

TEXTBOOK OF MEDICINE 




TEXTBOOK OF 

MEDICINE 

By Various Authors 


Edited by 

J. J. CONYBEARE 

M.C., D.M.Oxon., F.R.C.P. 

Phytidin to Guy's Hospital. London 


SEVENTH EDITIi 


EDINBURGH 

E. & S. LIVINGSTONE LTD. 
16 AND 17 TEVIOT PLACE 
1945 



SdLxt-Um, 

ITKindl JS^ilicm 

R^jpnnteA • 
SixiH 

Rej»ri^t%tc€t • 


J^ar^%umry 1929 
JM€^w^ 1032 
A.jp^ 1035 
OctoA^^ 1036 
rnlcm^XM^Mary 1033 
*/€xn«ccir^ 1030 
OcUfh^ 1040 
1041 
OcU^b^ 1042 
October 1043 
1045 


Jk£€ui^ ZV»9$^«cf 4^ €fre4Mt J^r4i€it%w% 



This Book is Dbdioatbd 

TO 

The Bight Honoithable Visooinn! Nuffield, 

O.B.E., F.B3., U.A., D.C.L., LL.D. 

IN APFBEOIATION OF HIS MANY 

Generous Benefactions to Medicine 




PREFACE 

TO THE SEVENTH EDITION 

O NE of the most surpiiamg features of the War has been 
the greatly increased demand for books, including medical 
books. The present seventh edition is the fourth to be 
published since the beginning of 1939, quite apart firom two 
reprints. The number of copies sold since the War more than 
equals the total number printed in the previous ten years. 

With the increasing tempo of the War the task of producing 
a new edition has become increasingly difficult, and I again 
crave the indulgence of readers in their criticisms of errors 
which have remained undetected. 

In this edition a new section on the Sulphonamides has 
been included, written by the Editor. In view of the rapid 
progress in the use of Penicillin it was thought beet to omit 
any detailed dracription of this form of chemotherapy. 

Surgeon Captain W. D. W. Brooks has rewritten much of 
the section on Pulmonary Tuberculosis, as has also been the 
case with the articles on Bronchiectasis, Bronchial Neoplasms 
and Asthma. He has also contributed an article on Sarcoidosis. 

In the Curdio-Vasoular System the articles on Adherent 
Pericardium and Constrictive Pericarditis, Left Ventricular 
Failure and Effort Syndrome have been completely rewritten, 
and also a short article on Periarteritis Nodosa has been included. 

Dr A. A. Osman has revised or rewritten mudh of the section 
on Renal Diseases, parrioulto'ly tliose portions of the book 
dealing with renal function and renal insuffioi&noy, anuria, 
hypertension, nephritis in pr^anoy, retinopatiiy and certain 
aspects of nephritis. 

The section on Infectious Diseases is substantially unaltered 
except tiiat a new article on Glandular Fever has bera included, 
tiansferred £rom the section on Diseases of the Bk>od and 

tB 



viii PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH EDITION 

Lymphatic Glands. In the Tropical section only minor changes 
have been made dealing with the treatment of Malaria and 
Bacillary Dysentery. 

In the Neurological and Psychological sections there are 
no major changes but Dr F. M. R. Walshe has rewritten Sinus 
Thrombosis, Acute and Subacute Myelitis, Epilepsy, and the 
Epidemiology of Poliomyelitis. 

In the section on Diseases of the Skin Dr G. B, Dowling 
has added an article on Lichen Planus an<J. rewritten these 
dealing with Impetigo and Eczema.*, 

A number of the X-ray plates' have been replaced by better 
examples, and a radiogram of Silicosis has been added. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank reviewers and readers 
of the sixth edition for their helpful criticisms, and my fellow 
contributors, many of whom have had to work under consider- 
able difficulties. I am specially indebted to Squadron Leader 
D. Stafford Clark and FIjing Officer C. E. Riddiough Wood 
for reading the proofs, and to Lieutenant E. A. WiUiams for 
revising the Index. Finally, I wish to acknowledge the unfailing 
courtesy, patience, and efficiency of the publishers and printers. 

J. J. CONYBEARE. 


1945. 



LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS 

P. M. F. Bishop, D.M., Clinical Endocrinologist, Gay’s HospitaL 

R. C. Bbook. M.S.. F.R.C.S., Assistant Surgeon, Gay’s HospitaL 

W. D. W. Bbooks, DJII., F.R.C.P., Physician in Charge of Out- 
Patients, St Bftuy’s Hospital. 

Maubiob Campbbix, D,M., F.R.C.P., Physician, Guy’s Hospital. 

J. J. CoNTBBABB, M.G., D.ltr, F.R.C.P., Physician, Guy’s 
Hospital. 

Desmond Cubban, M.B., F.R.C.P., D.P.M., Psychiatrist and 
Lecturer in Psychological Medicine, St George’s Hospital. 

Gkopfbby B. Dowuno, M.D., F.R.C.P., Physician to the Skin 
Department, St Thomas’s Hospital. 

Ebic Gdttmann, M.D., M.R.C.P., Department of dinioal 
Research, The Maudsley Hospital. 

E. H. R. Habbibs, M.D., F.l^.C.P.. D.P.H., Medical Superin- 
tendent, North-eastern Fever Hospital (London County 
Council). 

F. A. Knott, M.D., F.R.C.P., Director, Bacteriological Depart- 

ment, Guy’s Hospital. 

F. E. Lipscomb, D.P.H., D.T.M. &H., Group Captain, R.A.F. 

Vbbnon E. Llotd, M.C., M.B., B.S., Director of the Department 
for Venereal Diseases, Guy’s HospitaL 

Abthdb Maitland-Jonbs, M.C., M.D., F.R.C.P., 

Physician in Charge of the Children’s Department, London 
Hospital. 

A. A. Osman, DJ5.C., F.R.C.P., Phymoian to Queen Mary’s 
Hospital for the East End. 

m 

Tbbvob Owkn, M.B., F.B.C.P.(C.), F.R.O.P.(Lond.), Assodate in 
Medknne, University of Toronto. 

W. P. Stamm, M.B., B.8., Wing Oommander, R.AX 

F. M. B. Walshx, D.8o., M.D., F.R.G.P., Physician in Charge of 
^ Nentologmal Department, University Coll^ Hospital. 




CONTENTS 


INFBC3TIOU8 DISEASES 


Introdnotion • • . . 

Maa 

1 

Typhoid and Paratyphoid 

PA.I 

Seram Sioknees 

5 

Fevers . 

54 

The Use of Solphonamides 

6 

Cerebrospinal Fever 

65 

Penicillm. • . . . 

11 

Septicssmia .... 

72 

HaBmolytio Streptococcal Infec- 


Rheumatic Fever . 

74 

tions .... 

11 

Erjrthema Nodosum 

78 

Scarlet Fever 

12 

Influenza .... 

79 

Brysipelas .... 

19 

Glandular Fever . 

81 

Diphweria .... 

19 

Undulant and Abortus Fever . 

83 

Meades .... 

29 

SpirocluBtosis Ictero-hnmor- 


Qerman Meades 

35 

rhagica .... 

84 

Whooj^-oongh 

37 

Tetanus .... 

85 

Mumps .... 

40 

Anthrax .... 

89 

SmaUpoz .... 

42 

Glanders . , . 

90 

Vaccmia and Vaccination 

49 

Actinomjmosis ^ . . . 

90 

Chickenpoz .... 

62 

Psittacosis . . . .^ 

92 

TUBERCULOSIS 


Pathology .... 

94 

Laryngeal Tabetonloau . 

134 

Pathogenesu 

99 

Tabercaloais of the Aliment* 


Primary Tnbetoiiloiu Infection 

101 

aryTmct 

135 

Miliary Taberooloaia 

106 

TabOTcolouB Peritonitia . 

136 

Olandnlat Tnbetonloaa . 

111 

Renal Tnbetonlosia. 

138 

Pulmonary Tubotcnloaia . 

113 

Tuberonloua Diaeaees of the 


Tubwenloais of the Plenra 

130 

Sldn . ... 

140 


VBNKUEAL DISEASES 


GonotthoBa .... 

147 

Congenital STOhilis 
Treatment of Syphilis 

. 160 

Lymphogranuloma Ti^piinale . 
Acquired Syphilis . 

153 

154 

. 164 

TROPICAL DISEASES 


Introdnetiott 

172 

Baoillaiy Dysentery 

186 

Malaria 

173 

Amosbio Dyimatery 

190 

Blaclcwatn 

180 

Amosbic Biepatitis . 

194 

Leiihmaniai 

181 

Gholnea 

195 

Trypan 

D;^tery 

183 

185 

fl^pfue t 

Xi^ow Fever 

199 

200 



xii 


CONTENTS 


Dengue 

?AOI 

. 202 

Plague . 

... 

. 206 

Sandfly Fever 

. 203 

Leprosy 

. . *■•. 

. 208 

Typhus Fever 

. 203 

Yaws . 

. . • 

. 209 

Relapsing Fever 

. 205 

Rabies . 

• 

. 209 

DISEASES DUE 

TO METAZOAN 

PARASITES 



Diseases due to Flukes . • 211 Diseases due to Round 

Diseases due to Tape- worms . 212 Worms . . .217 

Hydatid Disease . 214 


Diseases of the Newly-bom 
Ansemia in Infancy and Child- 
hood . . . .225 

Gastro-intestinal Disorders . 226 
Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis 232 
Infantile Scurvy . . . 234 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 
222 


Rickets 

. 237 

Infantile Tetany . 

. 240 

Coeliac Disease 

. 243 

Cyclic Vomiting 

. 246 

Convulsions . 

. 248 


DISEASES DUE TO PHYSICAL AGENTS, POISONINGS, AND 
INTOXICATIONS 


Sea-sickness . 
Caisson Disease 
Anoxia . 
Heat-stroke . 
Lead-poisoning 
Arsenical Poisoning 
Mercurial Poisoning 


. 261 
. 261 
. 252 
. 253 
. 254 
. 269 
. 260 


Carbon Monoxide Poisoning . 260 
Food Poisoning . • 261 

Bromide and Barbiturate 
Poisoning . . 264 

Alcoholism .... 265 
Morphinism .... 268 
Cocainism .... 270 


DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 


Thyroid Gland . . 271 

Goitre 272 

Thyrotoxicosis . . . 273 * 

Myxoedema . 279 

Parathyroid Glands . . 281 

Tetany .... 282 
Adrenal Glands .283 

Addison’s Disease . 284 

Tumours .... 286 


Thymus Gland 
The Menopause 
Pituitary Gland 
Adenomata 
Pituitary Insufficiency 
Frdhlich’s Syndrome . 
Diabetes Inupidus 


. 286 
. 287 
. 288 
. 290 
. 292 
. 294 
. 295 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


IMabetes Mellitiu . 

. 297 

Vitamin Deficiency Diseases 

. 329 

Acidosis and AlkaloBU 

. 821 

Beri-beri . 

. 381 

Gout . . 

. 322 

Pellsgra 

. 332 

Obe^ 

. 826 

Scurvy 

. 333 



CONTENTS 


xm 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD. SPLEEN, AND LYMPHATIC GLANDS 


Physiology of |the Blood . 

FIOI 

. 336 

Blood Tmna^on . 

. 340 

Aniemia 

. 348 

Acholuric Jaundice 

. 349 

Pemioious Amemia 

. 361 

Idiopathic Hypochromic 

An- 

flsmia 

. 368 

Aplastic Annmia . 

. 360 

Ansemia in Pregnancy . 

. 361 

Agranulocytosis 

. 362 

P^ura 

. 363 

Symptomatic 

. 363 

Haamorrhagica . 

. 364 


^101 

Hereditary Haamorrhagic States 366 


Anaphylactoid Purpura 367 

Leukaemia • 368 

Polycythaemia 372 

Methaemoglobinsemia and Sul 
phsemoglobinaemia « 373 

Haemoglobinsemia . 374 

Hodgl^’s Disease . 375 

Sarcoidosis . . 378 

Lympho-sarcoma . 381 

Diseases of the Spleen 382 

Splenic Anaemia . 383 

Giaucher’s Splenomegaly 384 


DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTABY CANAL 


General Considerations . . 385 

Diseases of the Mouth . . 388 

Oral Sepsis . . . 388 

Stomatitis .... 389 

Salivary Glands . . . 390 


Diseases of the (Esophagus . 391 
(Esophagitis and 
Ulcer .... 392 
(Esophageal Obstruction . 392 
Carcinoma of the (Esophagus 393 


Achalasia of the Gardia . 394 

Diverticula . . . 396 i 

Hysterical Dysphagia . . 396 

Diseases of the Stomach and 
Duodenum . 397 

Acute Gastritis . . 4(X) 

Chronic Gastritis . 401 

Hsematemesia . . 402 

Gastric and Duodenal Ulcer 405 
Carcinoma of the Stomach . 416 

8]^hilis of the Stomach . 420 

Diaphragmatic Hernia . 420 

Acute Dilatation • 420 


Diseases of the Stomach and 
Duodenum — contd. 
Functional Disorders of the 


Stomach . . 421 

Beflex Dyspepsias . . . 424 

Nervous Dyspepsia. . . 424 

Diseases of the Intestines . 429 
Physiology of the Intestinal 
Movements . . 429 

Constipation . . . 430 

Chronic Diarrhoea . . 434 

Intussusception . . . 436 

Regional j^tero-colitis . 438 
Appendicitis . . . 438 

Diseases of the Ck>lon . 439 

Carcinoma . . 441 

Polyporis .... 443 
Ulcerarive (Tolitis . 443 

Muco-membranous Colitis . 446 
Diverticulitia . . . 448 

Hirschsprung’s Disease . 450 
Visoeioptoeas .451 


DISEASES OF THE LIYBR, QALDBLADDBB. PANCREAS, 
AND PERITONEUM 


Hseases of the lirer . 455 

Tests for Hepatic Efficiency 456 
Jaundice • . . .456 

CatarrhalJaundice • « 460 

Acute Necrosis of the liver . 462 


Diseases of the liver— confd. 
Afteotions of the Blood 
Vesseb of tibe liver 
Suppurative Diseases of the 
Liver «... 


463 

464 



XIV 


CONTENTS 


tAsm 

Diseases of the 

Cirrhosis of the liver . . 465 

Homoohromatosis . . 468 

Biliary Cirrhosis . . 468 

Syphilis of the Liver . . 469 

Malignaat Disease of the Liver 470 
Differential Diagnosis of 
Hepatic Enlargement . 471 
Diseases of the GkkU-bladder 
and Bile Ducts . . 473 

Cholecystitis . . 473 

Gall-stones . . . 476 

Carcinoma of the Bile Passages 480 


riei 

Diseases of the Pancreas . 481 
Acute PancreatitiB . . 482 

Chronic Pancreatitis . . 483 

Caroinoma of the Pancreas . 484 
Patioreatio Cysts . 485 

Pancreatic Calculi . 487 

Diseases of the Peritoneum . 487 
Peritonitis .... 487 
Subphrenic Abscess . 490 

Ascites .... 492 
CSarcinoma of the Peritoneum 494 


DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 


Anatomy and Physiology . 496 
Physical Signs of the Normal 
Heart .... 499 
Physical Signs suggesting 
Cardiac IKsease . 501 

Disturbances of Bate and 
Rhythm . . 504 

Tachycardia and Bradycardia 506 
Sinus Arrhythmia , . 507 

Extra-systoles . . . 608 

Paroxysmal Tachycardia . 510 
Heart Block . , 613 

Auricular Flutter . . 515 

Auricular Fibrillation . .517 

Pulsus Altemans . . 522 

Carditis .... 523 
Acute Myocarditis . . . 524 

Pericarditis .... 525 
Adherent Pericardium and Con- 
strictive Pericarditis . . 527 

Endocarditis .... 529 
Simple .... 530 
Acute Bacterial . . 532 

Subacute Bacterial . 533 

Chronic Valvular Disease . 535 
Mitral Disease . 536 

Aortic Valvular Disease . . 539 

Tricuspid and Pulmonary Val- 
vular Disease . .542 


Chronic Disease of the Heart 
Muscle .... 543 
Heart Failure . . 547 

The Anginal 83mdrome . . 548 

Coronary Occlusion . . 553 

Left Ventricular Failure . . 557 

Congestive Cardiac Failure • 558 
Treatment of Cardiac Failure • 562 
Peripheral Circulatory Failure 567 
Pregnancy and Heart Disease . 570 


Congenital Heart Disease . 571 

The Effort Syndrome . . 574 

Hypertension and Arterio- 
sclerosis .... 676 
Essentipd Hypertension . . 578 

Malignant Hypertension . . 582 

Dissecting Aneurysm of Aorta 683 
Syphilis of the Aorta . 584 

Aortic Aneurysm . . 686 

Thrombo-angiitis Obliterans . 689 
Periarteritis Nodosa . . 692 

Vasomotor Disorders . . 692 

Raymond’s Disease . . 592 

An^o-neurotic (Edema . 593 

Milroy’s Disease . . 594 

AcroparMthesia . 594 

Diseases of the Veins . 595 

Thrombosis and Embolism . 595 


DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

Diseases of the Nose , 598 I Adenoid Vegetations . 603 

Diwages of the Tonsils . . 600 I Diseases of the Larynx . . 604 



CONTENTS 


XV 


Diseases of the Tischea . . 607 

Diseases of the Bronchi . . 608 

Acute Bronchitis . . 609 

Chronic Bronchitis . . 612 

Bronchiectasis . • ; • 014 

Congenital Cjatic IMseasS^Of 
the Bronchi . . . 616 

Diseases of the Lungs . 619 

Effects of Disturbance of 
the Circulation . 619 

Emphjsenm . 620 

Pulmonary Collapse . . 622 

Lobar Pneumonia , 626 

Broncho-pneumonia . . 633 

Unresolved Pneumonia . 636 

RENAL 

Renal Function . . 672 

Tests of Renal Function . 676 

Signs and Symptoms of Renal 
Disease ... 684 

(Edema . . . 689 

Azottmnia and Uraemia . 690 

Bright’s Disease . 696 

Diffuse Qlomerulo-nephritis 697 
Acute Glomerulo-nephritis . 699 
Subacute Qlomerulo-nephritis 707 
Chronic Glomemlo-neporitis 709 
Focal Glomerulo-nephntis . 716 
The Nephroses . . 716 

AmyloidDiseaseoftheEidney 724 


AFFECTIONS OF THE 


Arthritis 

742 

Oeteo-arthritis . 

743 

Rheumatoid Artiiritis . 

746 

Ankylosing Spondylitis 

750 

Non-artionlar B^umatism 

751 

Diseases of Bones . 

752 

Osteitis Deformans 

752 


DISEASES OF THE 
The (leneral Symptomatadogy 
of Orgaikio Nervous 
DiaeaaeB .766 

Symptoms of Diseaae of the 
Motor System . 768 

Symptoms of Diseaae of the 
Afferent Nervous System . 761 


Diseases of the Lungs — coiUd. 
Pnlmoimry Abuess and 
Gangrene . . .640 

New Growths . . ,641 

Pnenmokonioees . . . 644 

AUeigic Conditions of the 
Rerairatory System. . 646 
Hay Fever . .647 

Asi^ma .... 648 
Diseases of the Pleura . . 653 

Spontaneous Pneumothorax 653 
Pleuri^ .... 665 
Chest Wounds . . . 658 

Empyema .... 666 
Diseases of the Mediastinum . 669 

DISEASES 

Pregnancy and Renal Disease . 725 
The Nephroscleroses . . 727 

Renal Arteriolosclerosis . 727 

Renal Arteriosclerosis . . 729 

Hydronephrosis and Pyoneph- 
rosis . . . .730 

BaeiUus eoli Infections . . 732 

Chronic Pyelitis . . . 734 

Perinephric Abscess . 737 

New Growths of the Eiidney . 738 
Renal Calculus .739 

Polycystic Kidneys . . 741 

JOINTS AND BONES 

Diseases of Bones — oonld. 
Osteogeneos Imperfecta . 763 
Osteomalacia . 753 

Mnltiide MyelomatoeiB . 753 
Aohondroimma . . . 754 

Hypertrophic Pulmonary 
Osteo-arthn^tiiy . . 754 

NERVOUS SYSTBli 

The General Symptomatology 
of Orgi^ Nervous 
Dueases—ooiitf. 

Electrical Reactions of 

Muscle . .765 

The Reflexes in DiagnMis . 766 
The Oetebtospinal Fluid . 769 



xvi 


CONTENTS 


Mm 

Diseases of the Cerebral 

Meninges and Hydro- 


cephalus . . 770 

Pachymeningitis . . 770 

Acute Leptomeningitis * 772 

Hydrocephalus . . . 776 

The Localising Signs of Disease 
of the Brain . . . 778 

Intracranial Tumours . . 785 

Cerebral Vascular Disease . 794 

Anatomy , . • . 794 

Pathology .... 796 
Symptomatology . . 800 

Hemiplegia . . . 806 

Diagnosis .... 808 
Prognosis .... 811 
Treatment . . .812 

Disturbances of Speech . . 814 

The Cerebral Palsies of 
Childhood . . . 819 

Cerebral Diplegia , .819 

Infantile Hemiplegia . . 820 ^ 

Sinus Thrombosis . . . 821 

Paralysis Agitans . . . 823 

Huntington's Chorea . . 826 

Hepato-lenticular Degeneration 827 
Cerebro-macular Disease . 827 
Toxic Encephalitis . . 828 

Cerebral Abscess . . . 828 

Chorea 832 

Rheumatic Chorea . 832 

Disseminated Sclerosis . . 835 


Acute Disseminated Encephalo- 
myelitis and Neuromyelitis 
Optica .... 841 
Virus Diseases of the Nervous 


System .... 842 
Poliomyelitis . . . 843 

Lethargic Encephalitis . 851 
Post-infective Encephalitis . 855 
Herpes Zoster . . . 855 

SjrphiUs of the Nervous System 857 
Cerebrospinal Syphilis . 861 
Dementia Paralytica . . 865 

Tabes Dorsalis . . .867 

Treatment of Neurosypbilis . 875 
Epilepsy . . . .878 

Pjknolepi^ and Narcolepsy . 886 


. 887 


PASS 

Afiections of the Cranial Nerves 889 


Olfactory Nerve . . . 889 

Optic Nerve . . 890 

Oculomotor Nerves . 893 

Trigeminal Nerve . . 896 

Trigeminal Neuralgia . . 897 

Facial Nerve . . • 900 

Eighth Nerve . . . 904 

Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh 
Nerves .... 907 
Hypoglossal Nerve . 909 

Compression of the Spinal 
Cord . . . .910 

Syringomyelia . 922 

Hsematomyelia . 927 


Acute and Subacute Necrotic 
Myelitis and Myelomalacia 927 
Subacute Combined Degenera- 
tion of the Spinal Cord . 928 
The Heredo'familia] Ataxies . 932 
Friedreichs Ataxy . . 932 

Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxy 934 
Progressive Muscular Atrophy 934 
Motor Neurone Disease . . 936 

Peroneal Muscular Atrophy . 939 
Muscular Dystrophy . . 940 

Myatonia Congenita . 943 

Myotonia Congenita . 943 

Myotonia Atrophica . 943 

Family Periodic Paralysis . 944 
Myasthenia Gravis . 944 

Poljmeuritis .... 946 
Lead Paralysis . . 953 

Interstitial Neuritis . . 954 

Sciatica and Sciatic Neuritis 955 
Herniation of the Nucleus 
Pulposus . . ^957 

Brachml Neuritis . 958 

Neuroma .... 959 
Afiections of the Spinal Nerves 960 
Lesions of the Brachial Plexus 962 
Cervical Rib . .966 

Lesions of the Lumbar and 
Sacral Plexuses . 970 

Occupational Cramps . . 972 

The Tics . . . 974 



CONTENTS 


xvii 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


FAOI 

iBtiolagy of Mental Disorder . 979 
S3nnptom8 encountered in 


Mental Disease 989 

Psychiatric Syndromes (Re- 
action Types) . . 1001 

Scheme of Examination . 1002 
Treatment .... 1006 
Psychological Treatment and 
Psychotherapy . . 1009 

Constitutional Anomalies . 1015 
Mental Deficiency . . 1020 

Organic Syndromes . . 1024 

Delirium .... 1025 
The Organic Dementias . 1030 
General Paralysis . 1030 

Mental Symptoms with 
Vascular Disease . . 1032 

Senile Dementia . . 1035 


FASI 

The Organic Dementias — oontd. 
Mental Symptoms in En- 
cephalitiB Lethargies . 1036 
Mental Symptoms in Epi- 
lepsy .... 1037 
Mental Symptoms following 
Head lajiuy . . . 1038 

Schizophrenia . 1040 

The AflPective Syndromes . 1051 
Manic-depressive States . 1051 
Anxiety States . . . 1059 

Hysterical Reactions . . 1062 

Obsessional States . 1066 

Legal Aspects of Mental niness 1068 
Admission of Patients to 
Mental Hospitals . . 1068 

Criminal Responsibility . 1071 
Civil Law . , . 1072 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


The Erythemas . , . 1074 

Pyogenic Infections of the 
Skin ... . 1082 

Staphylococcal Infections . 1083 
Mixed Infections . . 1088 

Seborrhcea and its Complica- 
tions .... 1090 
Acne .... 1091 
Eczema .... 1093 
Erythemato-squamous Derma- 
toses .... 1102 
Seborrhoeic Eczema . . 1103 

Pityriasis Rosea . 11% 

Psoriasis . . .1105 

Allergy and Diseases of the 
Skin . . . .1108 

Urticaria .... 1109 


Papular Urticaria . . 1112 

I Lichen Planus. Lichen Sim- 
plex, and lichenoid Erup- 
tions .... 1113 
The Alopecias . 1116 

Scleroderma and Dermato- 

myositis . . .1118 

Diseases due to Filterable 

Viruses. . 1121 

Herpes Simplex . 1121 

Verruca .... 1121 
MoUuscum Contagiosum . 1122 
I Ringworm Infections . . 1123 

! Pediculosis .... 1129 
‘ Scabies .... 1131 
External Treatment . . 1133 


APPENDIX 

Examination for Life Assurance 1139 

Indsx . 1145 




ILLUSTRATIONS 


no. TAOM 

1. Temperature Chart of Measles 31 

2. Diagram of Measles attenuated by Adult-immune Serum 34 

3. Temperature Chart of Smallpox 46 

4. Temperature Chart of Typhoid Fever .... 57 

5. Blood Sugar Tolerance Curves in Diabetes . 300 

6. Ijag *’ Blood Sugar Tolerance Curve .... 301 

7. Fractional Test Meal Chart ...... 398 

8. Normal Electrocardiograms 505 

9. Electrocardiogram of Auricular Extra-syatoles . 509 

10. Electrocardiogram of Auricular Extra-systoles . . . 509 

11. Electrocardiogram of Ventricular Extra-systoles . 509 

12. Electrocardiograms in Paroxysmal Tachycardia . 511 

13. Electrocardiogram in Complete Heart Block 515 

14. Electrocardiogram in Auricular fibrillation . . 519 

15. Electrocardiograms in Coronary Occlusion .... 555 

16. Central Motor Paths 759 

17. Central Sensory Paths 763 

18. Cortioal Localisation 780 

19. Coronal Section of the Left Cerebral Hemisphere . 795 


20 . Visual Disturbances from Lesions of the Visual Pathway . 891 

21. Cutaneous Areas supplied by the Posterior Nerve Boots • 916 


six 



X-RAY PLATES 


pun 

1. Large Primary TnbercalooB Focos and Gland 

2. Primary (Ghon’s) Focos of Tuberculosis . 

3. Epitobercolosis 

4. Epitobercolosis 

5. Secondary (Assmann’s) Focus of Tuberculosis 

6. Calcified Heematogenous Secondary Lesions 

7. Chronic Pulmonary Tuberculosis 

8. Tuberculous Pneumonia .... 

9. Senile Phthisis 

10. Artificial Pneumothorax with Adhesions . 

11. Artificial Pneumothorax with Adhesions divided 

12. Carcinoma of Lower End of (Esophagus 

13. Achalasia of the Cardia .... 

14. Hour-glass Ck>nstriction of Stomach . 

15. Gastric Ulcer imder Medical Treatment 

16. Carcinoma of Cardiac End of Stomach 

17. Congenital Short (Esophagus 

18. Polyposis of the Colon .... 

19. Ulcerative Colitis 

20. Diverticulitis of Colon .... 

21. Gall-stones visualised by Cholecystography 

22. Gall-bladder visualised by Cholecystography 

23. Bionchiectaric C!avities filled with lipiodol 

24. Bronchial Carcinoma (Bronchogram) 

25. Congenital Ciystic Disease of the Lung 

26. Pulmonary Abscess 

27. Silicosis 

28. Spontaneous Pneumothorax 

29. Hydro-Pneumothorax .... 

30. Ankyloang Spondylitis .... 

31. Osteo-aiihritis of Lumbar Spine 


facing page 102 
,, 102 

103 
103 
» 105 

105 
120 
121 
121 
128 
128 
394 
„ 395 

410 
.. 413 

.. 418 

420 
.. 444 

» 445 

.. 449 

480 
.. 480 

» 616 

616 
.. 617 

641 
645 
654 
664 

„ 760 

.. 751 



INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

INTRODUCTION 

M any diseaaes are caused by a recent or remote invasion 
or infection of the tissues of the host by a parasite 
(virus, bacterium, protozoon, metazoon, or fungus). 
The parasite (causal organism) is potentially transmissible 
from one host to another ; hence, such diseases are infective. 
Among them are soine caused by readily transmissible specific 
parasites, and these are known as the specific, or acute specific, 
infectious diseases or “ fevers ” — since “ fever," which implies 
raised temperature and quickened pulee, is a characteristic 
symptom. 

nodes of Infection. — ^Infection is commonly conveyed 
directly firom one person to another. Save in the enteric 
group of disease, where infection is spread by articles of 
drink or food, and in certain diseases such as plague, t3rphus, 
and malaria transmitted by the medium of i^eoted insects, 
the usual mode of spread is by spray or droplets projected 
through short distances by sneezing or coupling. The role 
played by fomites, e.g., utensils, biding, letters, or dust is 
in the light of recent research assuming increasing importance. 

Oarriera . — A carrim’ is one who, although not himself suffer- 
ing firom the specific disease, harbours, and is thus in a position 
to spread, the causal organism. The carrior state may persist 
for a varying period after a frank dinical attack of the disease 
which has rendered the patient himself immune. Such persons 
are termed ** convalescent carriers." Persons who have passed 
through no recognisable clinical attack of the disease can yet 
carry specific organisms and be immune to the disease ; they 
are healthy or contact carriers whose immunity has been 
acquired by small repeated sub-clinical doses of infi^tion. The 
carrier state may be transimrt or permanent. Non-immunes 
may carry temporarily, e.g., during latent infection or while 
incubating the duease. 

Inenhatton Period. — ^Between infection and olinioal attack 



i INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

is a latent period termed the inoubation period, which varies 
with each disease, and, within certain hmits, for the same 
disease. During incubation the organisms are multiplying 
and probably in large part being destroyed by the tissues, but 
ultimately the organisms or their products gain the upper hand, 
overcome the resistance of the host, and initiate that complex 
of symptoms and signs by which the “ disease ” is reoognis^. 

Variations, or apparent variations, in the length of the 
inoubation period of the same disease may depend on any of 
the following factors : (1) Difficulty in firing accurately the 
actual date upon which infection took place. (2) Variations in 
size and virulence of the initial infectiug dose and in the existing 
basal immunity of the host. (3) An ill-defined onset, particu- 
larly characteristic of tyjffioid fever and whooping-cough. 

Tablx of Incubatiok Pmtions 

The inoubation periods of the commoner acute infeotiouB 
diseases may be arranged in three groups. Short, Intermediate, 
and Long. 

I. Short : within 7 daye. 

Diphthwia. 

CersbroBrinal Fever. 

HssmoUrtio streptococcal infections : 

(а) Erysipelas. 

(б) Streptococcal puerperal sepsis. 

(c) Scarlet Fever. 

11. Intermediate : from 7 (o 14 days. 

Smallpox : To prodromal stage, 12 days. 

To rash, 14 days. 

Ex a n t h ematie, Loose or Eoropean Typhus, 12 to 14 
days. 

Enteric Fever : (a) Typhoid, 12 to 14 days. 

(6) Paratyphoid, 10 to 12 days. 

Measles : To Kophk’s spots, 10 to 11 days. 

To rash, 14 days. 

Whoopfng-coogh : To catarrhal stage, 7 to 14 days. 

To whoop, 14 to 21 days. 

in. Long : from 14 to 21 days. 

Ohiekenpox, 14 to 21 days. 

Bobella, 17 to 21 days. 

Momps, 18 to 21 days. 

Period of Invarimi.— Hie inoubation period is terminated by 



INTBODUanON 3 

the pwiod of mvaaion. The onset of this period may be abrupt 
or insidious. Symptoms and signs of the disease appear, and 
inotease in severity up to a phase of maximum intensity which 
is known as the fastigimn. Thereafter the disease prooesses 
abate and the period of decline or defervescence is entered. 
This is commonly succeeded by the period of convalescence and 
recovery. It is sometimes the case that the disease, after an 
atypical or ill-defined invasion period, does not increase in 
intensity or severity ; on the contrary, the symptoms and 
signs rapidly abate. The attack is then said to have aborted. 
Latent infections or subclinical attacks so mild as to be clinically 
unrecognisable are far commoner than was formerly believ^ 
to be the case. A frank clinical attack of several of the fevers 
only occurs in a mmority of people actually infected. 

Lasting active immunity is oommoidy produced as the 
result of an attack of an acute specific infection. By the time 
the stage of convalescence is reached, specific antib^es have 
been produced by the tissues in considerable amount. They 
may, however, fail to be produced, at any rate in sufficient 
quantity, by the time convalescence is reached ; in this case 
the patient may suffer a relapse of the disease if reinfection 
or reabsorption of toxins should occur. The immunity pro- 
duced after an attack usually remains at a high level for a 
number of years ; it wanes with time, and although this 
is a rare event in the case of most of the common fevers, 
a second aMaek may occur at a more or less long interval 
after the first. 

Types ot Pyrexia. — Rise of temperature is an almost constant 
manifestation of the acute infections and only fails to occur 
when the infection is so overwhelming that the tissues are 
unable to make any effective response. The following types 
are described : — 

(a) Continued. — ^The temperature, although showing the 
usual evening rise and morning fall, never reaches normal 
during the twenty-four hours. 

(b) Intermittent. — The temperature drops to normal at some 
time during the twenty-four hours. There is usually an evening 
rise and a morning fell, but occasionally in childrm the reverse 
may occur. 

(c) Remittent. — This term is occa s i o nally employed to 
indicate a temperature which, althou|^ not reaching normal, 
shows a considerable rise a^ fall during the twenty-four 
hours. 

(d) Hyperpyrexia. — Hus term is employed for temperatures 
of 106* P. or over. 



4 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

The onaefc of pyrexia may be abrupt or gradual. In typhoid 
fever the rise may be progreasive over a number of daj^s — the 
typical “ step-laddet ” pattern. Pyrexia may subside gradual^ 
over a number of days (lysia) or abruptly in the course of a 
few hours (mm). 

Needless to say, pyrexia is a frequent manifestation of 
disease, apart from the presence of the specific infectious fevers ; 
and, on the other hand, not all attacl^ of specific fevers are 
pyrexial. 

Certain acute infective diseases are characterised, at some 
stage in their course, by a ifloie or less typical rash. The 
changes produced in mucous membranes as the result of 
infection are called collectively the enarUhem, those produced 
in or upon the skin the exan^hem. The skin picture to which 
the- term exanthem, rash, or eruption is applied, is made up 
of certain primary skin lesions or a combination of these lesions. 
If more thw one type be present the rash is said to be dimorphic 
or polymorphic (pleomorphic). 

The following points must be noted in the examination of 
a rash : — 

1. Distrilyution. — The absoltUe and relative distribution of a 
rash are most important points in diagnosis. It is necessary 
to ascertain not only upon what parts of the body the rash 
is present or absent, but where it is present most profusely. 
The site first involved, its abundance, and type are im- 
portant. 

2. Type. — rash may consist of an erythema of any variety, 
of macvlee, papules, vesidea, pustules, pei^ia or wheals, or of 
any combination of these. The lesions may be discrete or 
confluent, either generally or locally. 

3. Colour. — ^This is important, especially in considering the 
erythematous types of rash. 

4. Itching. — This is an unusual symptom of the acute 
exanthemata, which, however, sometimes cause intense irrita- 
tion. The eruptions of secondary syphilis, which must be 
differentiated from the acute exanthemata, do not itch. The 
possible effects upon the appearance of the eruption of itching 
or treatment — local or general — most be considered. 

5. Prodromal Bashis. — A prodromal rash is one which 
appears and, unless petechial, commonly disappears before 
the rash characteristic of the disease develops. Unless the 
possibility of a prodromal rash be borne in mind, a serioos 
mistake in diagnosis may be made. Such radies are either 
exythematous (soarlatiniform or macular), urtioarial or petediial. 



INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


6 


SERUM DISEASE OR SERUM SICKNESS 

Following the administration of therapeutic sera, the 
syndrome known as serum disease may occur due to foreign 
proteins contained therein. Its incidence has been very much 
diminished by the employment of “ protein-digested ” 
(globulin-modified) products of very low protein content, 
^rum sickness ordinarily appears b^ween the seventh and 
fourteenth day after administration. The main features are 
P 3 uexia with sometimes a rigor, a rash which is typically 
urticanial and sometimes polymorphic, and less commonly, 
adenitis and arthritis. Ttwsient albmnimuia is frequent. 
The duration of serum disease may be from a few hours to 
three or more days. The rash, which may be confined to 
the site of injection, is the most constant phenomenon. What- 
ever other elements are present, wheals can almost always 
l>e found on some portion of the body. The urticarial eruption 
may be associated with a rash of scarlatiniform type. Serum 
rashes give rise to intense irritation. This can usually be 
relieved by an alkaline lotion, but in severe attacks the adxoinis- 
tration of adrenalin hypodermically (5 to 10 minima of a 1 in 
1,000 solution) follow^ by ephedrine (i to ^ gr. three or four 
hourly by mouth) frequently affords rapid relief. In those 
who are naturally sensitive to protein, signs of serum sickness 
may appear within a few minutes or hours of administration, 
and in such patients may be of alarming severity. The symp- 
toms are clinically similar to anaphylaxis. The worst examples 
occur in those who have never received serum before (atopies). 
Fortunately, only about one in 70,000 persons exhibit this 
extreme serum-sensitiveness or atopy. If a period of more than 
ten days has elapsed between the administration of two doses of 
serum derived from the same species of animal, the patient 
may show signs of sensitiveness following upon the injection 
of the second dose. Hence inquiry sho^d always be made 
as to any previous administration of serum, and any patient 
who may be presumed to be serum-sensitive owing to lapse 
of time since the last injection, or who gives a history of asthma, 
particularly of horse-asthma, should be eleaeruitiaed before a 
therapeutic dose is injected. 

The method of desensitisation depends upon the route 
decided upon for tite subsequent injection of the therapeutic 
dose. If this is to be itUravenoua, then 0*1 c.c. of the therapeutic 
wnim (not normal horse serum) dilated in 10 c.c. of sterile 
isotonic saline solution at body temperature is injected sloiriy 
into a vtin. If symptoms of sensitiveness appear following this 



6 I NFEC TI O US DISEASES 

dose, it is repeated in an hour : if nothing untoward follotro the 
first dose, the second dose may be one of 0*5 o.o. of serum 
similarly diluted and injected. If intramuscular therapy be 
proposed, the first desensitisii^ dose consists of 0*1 o.o. of 
serum diluted 1 in 10, irUradermally, and a second of 0*5 o.o., 
similarly diluted, tn^ffitMCulaWy. Kno signs of serum sensitiTe- 
ness have appeared after i^ese des en si t isi ng doses, the 
therapeutic dose may be injected one hour later. An urtioarial 
rash, local or general, and, occasionally, vomiting, sweating, 
respiratory and drculatory embarrassment may follow the 
injection of the desensitising dose. No therapeutic dose must 
be given until, after the last desensitising dose, the patient has 
shown no signs of sensitiveness, the desensitising doses bmng 
continued at intervak if necessary. In all but the slightest 
cases of anaphylactic manifestations, atropine and adrenalin 
must be injected at once. Except in intravenous serum therapy, 
anything except trifling signs of serum sensitiveness are rare, 
even when the desensitising dose is inadvertently omitted. 
Nevertheless, deeensitisation by the appropriate method must 
never be omitted when there is a past history of serum injection 
or a personal or family history of asthma, although neither 
tests for sensitivity nor methods of desmuntisation are wholly 
reliable. Asthmatic patients should never receive serum 
intravenously. E. H. R. Hakribs. 

THE USE OF SULPHONAMIDES 

The employment of drugs of the sulphonamide group has 
probably saved more lives in the last ten years than any other 
therapeutic advance in the last half century. It is, however, most 
important that the student and practitioner should be thoroughly 
familiar with the indications which call for sulphonamides and 
with their toxic effects. The routine administration of such drugs 
to every patient with fever or evidence of infection, without 
regard to diagnosis, cannot be too severely condemned. In 
many diseases, such as influenza, tuberculosis and ent^io 
fever, sulphonamides are not only useless but hannfuL Further, 
the haphazard administration of sulphonamideB in small or 
irregular doses may render bacteria resistant to the drugs and 
thereby interfere with effective treatment later. It is dear, 
therefore, that before prescribing sulphonamides it is essential 
first to reach at any rate a tentative diagnosis. Even when 
it has been dedded to administer sulpho namide s it is almost 
equdly importimt to select that compound of the group which 
is best suit^ to ti^ case. 



7 


THE USE OP SULPHONAMIDES 

lloda ol Action. — Sulphonamide drugs are baoteriostatio 
rather than baotmcidal, i.e., they inhibit the multiplication 
of organisms. The fewer the organisms the more effective is 
the bacteriostatic effect. Moreover, the concentration of the 
drug in the blood and body fluids must be sufficient to produce 
bacteriostasis, and hence sulphonamides must be given in the 
optimum dose to produce and maintain such a concentration 
for an adequate period, e.g., six to seven days. If clinical 
response is not evident by that time it will seldom be obtained 
by prolonging chemotherapy, but the drugs should always be 
continued for two or three da3rs after apparent improvement 
to minimise the risk of relapse. By no means idl bacteria 
are affected by the drugs and in such cases no benefit can 
result from their administration. There is also evidence 
that inadequate doses may render bacteria insusceptible 
to the drug, a condition often described as “ sulphonamide- 
fast.” 

Varieties <A Salphonamide Brags. — ^There are numerous 
trade names for the various sulphonamide compounds, but to 
avoid confusion the drugs shoidd be prescribe under their 
recognised non-proprietary names. The term sulphonamide is 
a general one and does not indicate any particular drug. Those 
in relatively common use are Sulphanilamide, Sulphapyridine, 
Sulphathia^le, Sulphadiazine and Sulphaguanidine. 

All the sulphonamides may produce toxic effects of minor 
or major importance and the dnigs vary in their efficacy on 
various bacteria. The following table shows the indications for 
the three compounds most often available and the toxic effects 
most often encountered. 


Typo of Drag. 

Organiams 

Suoceptible. 

Chief Toxic EffccU. 

Sulphonikiiiido . 

Hiomolytic 

•treptoooooi. 

B, 

Headache. 

CyanostB. 

Light sonaitiiiation. 

SulphopyricUiio . 

Meningococci. 

PnetimoooooL 

Oonooooci. 

Headache. 

Nausea and vomiting. 
HMnaiaria. 

Anuria, 

Dermatitis. 

SulpboehlMob . 

Moningoooooi. 

Pneninoooooi 

Qonoooooi. 

8Up^k>oood. 

Hematuria. 

Anuria. 
















8 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

Sulphadiazine is effective against all bacteria for which 
sulphathiazole is given but is not readily available in Great 
Britain at the present time. It is perhaps less likely to produce 
toxic effects. Sulphaguanidine is not readily absorb^ from 
the bowel and is therefore only of value in infections such as 
bacillary dysentery {vide p. 188). 

Toxic Effects. — It is most imjwrtant that every patient 
receiving sulphonamides should be kept under close observation 
for toxic effects of the drug. Those most commonly encountered 
are as foUows : 

1. Cyanosis. — ^This is practically confined to patients 
taking sulphanilamide. It is of no pathological significance, 
though it may make the patient look much more iU than he 
really is. It is never a reason for stopping the drug, nor is there 
any object in withholding sulphur-containing foods or medicines, 
e.g., eggs or sulphates, as was at one time advised on the ground 
that the colour was due to sulphsemoglobinsemia. 

2. Headache, Nausea and Vomiting. — ^These sj/roptoms, 
including anorexia, are very common with sulphapyridine but 
relatively rare with other sulphonamides. If vomiting is severe 
intravenous administration may be necessary, but very often 
if sulphathiazole or sulphadiazine is substituted for a few 
doses the vomiting will cease. Sulphap 3 rridine should always 
be given crushed and suspended in milk or water. If 
sulphonamides are really required they should never be stopped: 
owing to vomiting. 

3. Hoematuria and Anuria. — ^These may occur with sulpha- 
pyridine, sulphathiazole, and snlphadiazine but practically 
never with sulphanilamide. They are due to blockage of the 
urinary passages, including the renal tubules, by crystalline 
deposits of the drug. When the urinary output is small, as 
in hot climates, the danger is a very real one and fatalities 
have occurred. The urinary output should be maintained at 
a minimum of 50 oz. per diem by insisting on the patient 
taking 5 to 6 pints of fluid daily and by giving sufficient alkalis 
(sodiiun bicarbonate and potassium citrate) to keep the urine 
alkaline to litmus. Warning symptoms are pain in the loins, 
often radiating towards the groins, haunaturia and oliguria. 
It must, however, be remembei^ that hsematnria may occasion- 
ally occur as a result of the disease — e.g., cerebrospinal fever — 
for which the drug is being given. Oliguria and htematoria call 
for immediate cessation of chemotherapy uid increased fluid 
intake. If, however, anuria develops, cystoscopy and passage of 
ureteric cathet^ me required and the renal ^ves should be 
iir^fated with warm 2*5 per cent, solution of sodium bicarbonate. 



THE USE OP SULPHONAMIDES 


9 


4. Svlphonamide Dermatitis . — ^This is not an uncommon 
oom}>lication and frequently develops with “ drug fever ” 
as a papular erythematous eruption towards the end of 
treatment. It may be evidence of sensitisation and if so the 
rash will fade rapidly and the patient become desensitised if 
administration is continued. If evidence of improvement 
is not apparent in tweniy-four hours the drug should be 
stopped, as drug retention may also cause a rash and this 
is liable to be associated with toxic reactions. Sensitised 
patients may develop an immediate rash if sulphonamide is 
again administered, even months later. 

Apart from the toxic effects listed above there are numerous 
others which may occur occasionally with any of the sulphona- 
mides. 

(i) Leucopenia and Agranulocytosis. — A,mild leuoopenia with 
relative lymphocytosis is frequently observed during sulphona- 
mide administration, but in occasional cases leucopenia may 
progress to agranulocytosis {vide p. 362). The latter is one of 
the most dangerous toxic effects of suphonamide treatment, 
though fortunately rare. It seldom occurs until 30 grm. have 
l>een taken. In order to obtain early warning of its imminence 
a complete white cell count is essenti^ on alternate days in every 
patient who has taken 25 grm. of the drug. Administration 
should be stopped immediately if the total leuooc 3 de count falls 
below 6,000 or the neutrophils below 60 per cent. The symptoms 
and treatment of agranulocytosis are described on page 362. 

(ii) Drug Fever . — ^This occurs chiefly between the fifth and 
eighth day and is usually low. Becrudesoence of infection is 
likely to occur earlier but may cause confusion. If drug fever 
is diagnosed the indications for continued administration 
should be carefully considered wd in any case control with 
frequent blood counts is essential. 

(iii) An<em»a.— Various forms of antemia, aplastic, htemo- 
lytic, or thrombocytopenic, are very rare but potentially 
dangerous. The drug ^ould be stoppi^ immediately and the 
])atient transfused with fresh blood. 

Methods ot Administration. — (i) Oral. — ^This is the method 
of choice. The tablets must be thoroughly orusked and the 
}K)wder is best given in milk or water, preferably suspended 
with a little tragaoanth ; the addition of sodium bicarbonate 
may help to allay gastric irritation. As it is essential to keep 
up the oonoentration of the drug in the blood and body fluids 
the 4o8es must be |^ven at r^fular intervals, and the polfeid 
should ^ aroused ^ nseessary, olhmwise tto oonoentration 
may fall rapidly during the ni^t and baoterioatasis ceases. 



10 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


(ii) Intravenous Route. — ^This is required when the patient 
fails to absorb the tablets given by mouth or is suffering from 
an acute and severe illness, e.g., cerebrospinal fever. The 
soluble sodium salts of sulphapyridine or suphathiaxole are 
employed. These are given very dotdy and great care is 
necessary to avoid the fluid escaping outside the vein. Usually 
after one or two intravenous injections the patient is w^ 
enou|^ to take the drug by mouth. 

(iii) Intramuscular injection is rarely required and produces 
tissue necrosis. If it is essential, it should be given deeply into 
the muscle well away from large nerves, e.g., into the vastus 
extemuB. 

Dosage in Adults. — ^This will vary with the severity of the 
infection. When it is essential to get the patient rapidly under 
the influence of the drug the initial dose should be larg^ and is 
often termed the “ loa^ng ** dose. It is usually 2 grm., i.e., 
four i grm. tablets by mouth or in the more acute Besses 2 grm. 
intravenously. In really severe infections such as cerebro- 
spinal fever this is followed by four-hourly doses of 1*5 grm. 
for the first two or three days. For the next two days the dose 
is maintained at 1 grm. four-hourly and then for two further 
days 1 grm. six-hourly. Thus the total during the first two days 
is 19 grm., during the third and fourth days 12 grm., and during 
the fifth and sixth days 8 grm., i.e., a total course of approxi- 
mately 40 grm. It should rarely be necessary to prolong treat- 
ment further than six or seven days. A leucocyte coimt is 
essential not later than the third day, and on alternate days 
subsequently to detect early any tendency to leucopenia or 
agran^ocytosis. 

In less serious and less acute illnesses there is no necessity 
for a “ loading ” dose, and for the first two days 1 grm. four- 
hourly is sufficimit. This may be reduced during the third 
and fourth days to 1 grm. six-hourly and during the fifth and 
sixth days to 1 grm. eight-hourly. 

In n^d infections 1 grm. of sulphapyridine or 1^ grm. of 
sulphathiazole are usually given every eight hours for six or 
seven days. 

A careful record must be kept of every dose of the drug given. 
This is best achieved by noting on the tempendure chart the 
amount and the type of sulphonamide need. 

Dosage in Children and Intaati. — Childmi and infante, 
weight for wei^t, tolerate sulphonamides better than adults. 
Infant s up to six months can be givmi } to } grm. four-hourly ; 
from six months to tiiree years } to } grm. four-hourly ; older 
children | to | grm. four-hourly. 



aEMOLYTIC STREPTOCOCCAL INFECTIONS 11 


PENICILLIN 

It is probable that p^cillin will prove as valuable a 
ohemotheimpentio agent as the sulphonamides, though owing 
to shortage of supply clinical taial has only been possible on a 
limited scale. 

Like the sulphonamides, penicillin is bacteriostatic and 
not bactericidal. Moreover, as with sulphonamides, only certain 
organisms are sensitive to penicillin. These include the strepto- 
coccus, pneumococcus, gonococcus, meningococcus and staphy- 
lococcus. BaciUi coli, proteus, pyoepanem, and the tubercle 
bacillus are insensitive. Just as insufficient dosage of sulphon- 
amides may render organisms sulphonamide-fast, insufficient 
doses of penicillm may produce resistance to the drug. 

PenicUlin may Im given intravenously, intramuscularly, 
intrathecally, or be appUed locally in the case of wounds and 
bums. It seems probable that penicillin is effective even 
in the presence of pus. The present limited experience of 
the drug seems to show that while penicillin can produce 
bacteriostasis of sensitive micro-organisms it is non-toxic to 
the patient. 

It may be confidently anticipated that great progress will 
be made in the clinical use of penicillin when supplies become 
more readily available. For details of treatment the reader is 
referred to current literature. 

J. J. CONYBEABK. 

HAEMOLYTIC STREPTOCOCCAL INFECTIONS 
(a) ScmUi Fever, (b) BryeipeHcu 

Many strains of str^tococd pathogenic for man, when 
grown upon blood-agar htsmolyse tim m^um, with the result 
that a wide zone of blanohmg (/S-luemolysis) appears around 
eadi colony. These ^ Aomolylie ^reptococei are divided into 
groupv (Laacefield), of which Group A is the most importuit, 
and into serologic^ typea (Griffith). Eilhm as primary or 
secondary invadm, they are the cause of a variuty of dinical 
oonditmns whidi ate brou^t about tiuouf^ tiieir properties 
of inmaivtneat and toxieiiy. These two properties ate possessed 
in varying degree diffHmt smological types and their relative 
clinicd importance varies with the site of iirfeotion, the viruience 
of die sbrain or type (its invadveDeas and toxicity) and the 
basal mmsmity the host. Certain ^ypes whidi produce a 
soluble erythrogenio toxin ficedly ate responsible in susceptible 



12 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

(Dick-positive) subjects for scarlet fever, but it is essential to 
realise that the same t 3 rpe which in one person has given rise 
to a trivial sore throat may, when transmitted to another under 
suitable conditions, cause scarlet fever, erysipelas or puerperal 
septioasmia. 

The iii8t two of these diseases are here described. 


SCARLET FEVER 
(Scarlatina) 

iEtiology. — Scarlet fever was first so named by Sydenham 
in 1676, and his description applied to a form so mild as to 
consist in his view of a rash and nothing more. He made no 
mention of a sore throat, but the modem conception of the 
disease is that it may consist in a sore throat and nothing else. 

In England, for a number of years, scarlet fever has been 
a very mild disease with a fatality rate of less than 1 per cent. 
There is, so far, no evidence of a reversion to the severe forms 
which occasioned great mortality in this country and elsewhere 
throughout the eighteenth and the earlier years of the 
nineteenth century ; but the disease in Eastern Europe is 
still severe. 

In spite of a high isolation-rate for many years, scarlet fever 
is as prevalent as ever and this is due to the occurrence of 
subcli^cal infections, very mild unrecognised oases and 
cfuiiers. 

Scarlet fever is endemic in coirntries with temperate climate. 
The disease may become established in subtropical oountaries, 
but in the tropics it is very rarely encountered. Epidemic 
waves occur at intervals of five to seven years. Very dry 
years appear to favour great prevalence. “ Seasonal inoidenoe 
is more concentrated on late autumn and winter than formerly, 
with a reduction in prevalence in the spring and summer 
months ” (H. M. Woods). Scarlet fever is a disease of industrial 
populations, crowded conditions of life affording opportunities 
for the spread of infection by close personal contact. It is 
mainly a disease of childhood. Uncommon in infancy, the 
incidence rises steadily up to five years of age and then steeply 
from ages five to ten — ^the result of school infections. The 
maximum case mortality occurs amongst children up to three 
years of age. This is due to the greater frequency of the septic 
type of the disease in very young children. At all ages fiwwalss 
are attained in greater numbers than maks. 



SCARLET FEVER 13 

Baoteri<dogy and Pathology. — Scarlet fever is caused by 
certain strains of heemolytio streptococci proliferating at the 
portal of entry, commonly the nasopharynx. Soluble toxins 
are produced, one of which causes the rash in susceptible 
(Dick-positive) subjects. Occasionally the causal organism 
invades tissues damaged by the toxins, producing complications 
of the septic type. 

The blood piclvre shows a polymorphonuclear leucocytosis 
and eosinoplulia. 

In the hypertoxic or malignant form of the disease, in which 
the patient dies in a few hours from overwhelming toxaemia, 
the only appearances seen post-mortem are general congestion 
of all organs, with haemorrhages into the suprarenals. Apart 
from this type of case, death in scarlet fever results i^m 
complications due either to toxin damage alone, or to invasion 
of otlier tissues by the causal or other organisms. Myocardial 
degeneration, endocarditis, pericarditis, nephritb, suppurative 
adenitis, arthritis, and septic broncho-pneumonia are the 
pathological conditions most likely to be present at autopsy. 

Inenbation Period. — Two to four days, commonly ; extreme 
limits of one to seven days are recorded. 

OiMfifleation of Types. — Scarlet fever presents the following 
clinical types : — 

1. Simple. — A tonsillitis is followed by manifestations of 
toxin absorption ranging from trifling to moderate severity. 

2. Toxic (“ Malignant ”). — ^Toxin production and absorp- 
tion are much greater than in the simple type, and may be 
overwhelming. The difference in the dkwase process between 
1 and 2 is one of d^[ree only. 

3. Septic. — Local or general sepsis due to the specific 
organism mperadded to toxaemia. 

Types 2 and 3 are now of rare occurrence. 

4. Surgical. — ^The infection of vaounda or bums, or the 
genitalia during the puerperium, with the specific organism 
may result in scarlet fever. The nasophsuynx is not i^ected 
in these forms which otherwise are indistinguishable clinically 
from ordinary attacks, and tend to be severe. 

Clinical Description. — ^l^pically, an enanthdin is followed 
by an exanthem or rash, but this may fail to appear or be so 
faint as to escape recognition. The onset is usually abrupt. 
Sore throat, nausea or vomiting, headache tmd riiivering, rise 
of temperature to between lOO” and 103° F., and tachycardia 
out of proportion to the pgrexia are the usual symptoms at the 
onset. The fauces too injected, and, after the first few hours, 
the tonsik either present a ole^, intensely red appearance or 



14 INFEmonS DISEASES 

are covered with a yellowish exudate which is readily removable. 
Sometimes the exudate is more tenacious, and may have a 
membranous character which may be mistaken for faucial 
diphtheria. Ihe soft palate is injected and presents, typically, 
a “ stippled ” appearance. The tongue undergoes the following 
oharacteristio changes : (1) “ White strawberxy ” tongue : the 
dorsum is covered, except at the edgw, with a creamy white 
for through which the enlarged papillte project. (2) " Red 
strawberry ” tongue : the fur gradually strips from the edges 
inwards, leaving, after the lapse of three or four days, a perfectly 
clean, red, congested tongue with enlarged papilhe. Occasion- 
ally the tongue assumes a much darker shtule of red, and is 
then known as a “ raspberry ” tongue. The enanthem is 
evidence of a haemolytic streptococcal invasion of the fauces 
and when present without the rash is termed " septic sore 
throat." 

Twenty-four to thirty-six hours after the initial symptoms 
the rash commences to appear. First to be seen upon the neck, 
it gradually spreads downwards over the trunk and limbs, 
but rarely appears on the fsce. The forehead and cheeks are 
brightly flush^, with a contrasted area of *' oiroumoral pallor." 
Ihe ra^ is a punctale erythema: points of deep coloration 
are set in the centres of irregular small islands of bright red 
erythema which are usually so closely set on the trunk as to be 
confluent, when an appearance of ui^orm redness with deeper 
punctations is product. Commonly a subicteric tinge can 
be seen. The rash is sometimes blotchy upon the arms and 
legs. It may often be seen in its typical form upon the innmr 
sides of the thighs, even when it has commenced to fade upon 
the upper portions of the body. Occasionally the rash 
produces itchuig. 

Pastia's Sign consists in the appearance of linear brown 
staining mid tiny petechite at tlM flexures, particularly in 
the elbow and the popliteal space. This sign is present in 
a large proportion of cases of scarlet fever. Although not 
pathognomonic, it may yet afford considerabte assistance in 
the diagnosis of a frtded scarlet fever rash, l^e petechias are, 
of course, evident after the aythematous element ^ faded. 
The rash fades in the same order as it appeared, and is fo^wed 
by desqmmation, of " pin-hole " type, of the affected dun, 
&8t visible at t^ root of the neck and beneath the cdavidlM 
about a week after the appearance of die rash ; later, on the 
trunk, palms (14th day), and soles (21st day). 

In the simple type of scarlet &ver there is frequently some 
enlargement of the oervioal lymidiado glandf Md a 



16 


SGABLBT FEVER 

albununiina is nob annsnal. The temperstuie £elUb in three 
or four days. Convalesoenoe may be intorrupted by one or 
more of late oomplioataons described below. 

In the very rare toxic type the onset is marked by ri^rs and 
hyperpyrexia. Persistent vomitilng, diarrhcea, and delirium are 
common. The rash is oharaoteristioally b«^y formed and 
dusky in odour. Death may result frmn the effects of profound 
toxeemia in from twenty-four to thiri^-six hours. 

The septic type, also rare, which is chiefly seen in children up to 
three years of age, is characterised by the early occurrence of 
sinusitis, rhinitis, suppurative cervical adenitis, and sometimes 
general septicssmia. Broncho-pneumonia is not an uncommon 
terminal event in these oases. 

Oomplioatioiis. — ^Apart from the septic lyTpo of the disease, 
the oomplioatioiu of scarlet fever ma^est themselves chiefly 
between the second and third week of the illness. They are 
due to toxic action or to bacterial extension from the portal of 
entry. The important complications are the following : — 

(a) Renal. — ^Febrile albuminuria ooonning early in the 
disease is nsoally of short duration, but occasionally it may 
persist. Renal oomiflioations are to be expected most often 
during the second or third week. Th^ may follow the mildest 
initid attack of the disease, imd range from albuminuria to 
acute nephritis with suppression of urine and unsmia. The 
urine may contain varying amounts of blood, and in appearance 
may thus be slightly “ smoky ** or obviously red. 

(b) Cardiac . — ^Myocardial inflammation is probably oom- 
moner than is generally believed, but slight grades pass 
undetected. Endocarditis, except in association wi^ secondary 
rheumatio in&otions, is not common. Suppurative pericarditis 
occurs m a very small percentage of oases. 

(c) ArthrUie. — Joint pains may occur during the initial 
toxemia or during serum sioknees. Polyarthritis, with or 
without effusion, later in ^e attack is of rheumatio origin. 
Streptococcal ea/ppraraiint arthritis, epipltyeiHa, and oaleomydUie 
are uncommon but seritw oom^oations which must not be 
confused with rheumatism. 

(d) Atmtl. — Otitis media occurs in 6 to 8 per edit, of oases. 
Young children, partionlariiy those who have oclaiged adenoids, 
are most liaUe to infsotion of the middle ear by direct spread 
throng the Eustachian tube. Rupture of the drum and the 
discharge of pus may be quite painless and qmiptomlesB, or there 

1m evidence of scute inflection the mastoid antrum. 
Rhinitis and adenitis are occasional late oomplioatkms. 

DI s gnoeii. — MOd eas es may give rise to considerable 



16 INFEOnOUS DISEASES 

difficulties in diagnosis. With the exception, perhaps, of the 
true “ raapberry ” tongue, no one sign can be regarded as 
pathognomonic ; aU the signs and symptoms must be con- 
sidered. The onset presents nothi^ characteristic. The 
occurrence of tachyoarffia out of proportion to the p 3 rTexia is 
sometimes of value. The condition of the throat has to be 
distinguished firom various forms of tonsillitis due to other 
organisms. An absolutely normal condition of the fauces is 
inconsistent with the early stage of scarlet fever other than 
“ surgical.” The appearances may be mistaken for diphtheria, 
which may also be concurrent. Except in the “ surgical ” 
forms swabbings from the fauces plated on blood-agar overnight 
yield almost pure cultures showing naked-eye /5-hsemolyais of 
the medium. The thickly furred tongue has to be distinguished 
fix>m the similarly furred tongue of acute rheumatism. The 
papillated tongue may be simulated by other conditions, which 
give rise to an acute or subacute exfoliative glossitis, such as 
measles or gastro-enteritis in young children. The rash may be 
confused with that of rubella. Prodromal rashes like those of 
scarlet fever occur in measles, smallpox, and chickenpox. The 
irritation produced by a new flannel garment or by inunctions 
of camphorated oil may give rise to localised rashes of 
scarlatij^orm type. Certain drugs such as salicylates, foods, 
e.g., strawberries, therapeutic animal sera, and enemata may 
give rise to rashes of soarlatiniform type which may b« 
mistaken for scarlet fever. Circtunoral ^dlor is not peculiar 
to scarlet fever. Skin diseases, such as pityriasis rubra should 
not be confused if the history, absence of enanthem and 
pyrexia, and the distribution are considered. 

The desquamation of scarlet fever most be distinguished 
ficom the “ branny ” peeling following after measles, and to 
a lesser extent after rubella. The e^oliation of skin which 
occurs upon the chest of a child after the application of poultices 
for some pulmonary condition, and the shedding of layers of 
dead skin in ne^eoted children can readily be distinguished. 
The milder grades of iohthyoris ate sometimes oonfu^ with 
the desquamation of scarlet fever. 

The Didt Ust and the SckuUz'Charlion reaction may i^ord 
some assistance in diagnosis. 

(a) The Dick Test— As already stated, the specific lunno' 
lytic stteptoooooos produces a soluble toxin. The latter k 
employed in an intradermal test with the same teohnJkpw M 
the Sk^ok test {vide p. 27) to detect persons who are susoi^ble 
to the toxin of sculet fever. Since animals are not Buso^ptibfe 
to the toxin, each hatch has to be tested in various dilutiont 



SCABLBT FEVER 17 

upon human immnnes and non-immnnea until a suitable 
dilation for routine use is arrived at. A usual dilution is 
1 in 1,000. A “ skin test dose *’ consists of 0*2 o.o. of sudi a 
dilation injected intradomally into the skin of the forearm ; 
since “ pseudo ” reactions are rare, a control injection is usually 
omitted. Readings of the results, whidi dosdy resemble those 
of the Schick test in appearance, are possible in twelve hours. 
The smallest reaction is to be read as positive. 13iose who 
give a podtive test are conddeted to be susceptible to scarlet 
fever, i.e., including the rash. If the test be negative, immunity 
to the rash-producing toxin,' but not to tonsillitis, may be 
presamed. 

The percentage of sosceptibles in the different age groups 
closely corresponds, in children, to the percentages of Schick 
positive reactors. In adolescents, however, the two curves 
begin to show condderable variation. The peroenti^ of 
inununes to scarlet fever in these older age groups is higher 
than the percentage of inununes to diphtbnia. llie inference 
is that many more people become immunised to scarlet fever 
toxin than to diphtheria as the result either of mild unrecognised 
clinical attacks of the disease of small repeated “ immuniring ” 
infections. The great majority of persons who have had an 
attack of scarlet fever at any time give a negative reaction. 
The reaction is podtive in 80 per cent, of oases of scarlet fever 
during the first three days of the attack ; later, skin immunity 
is prcduoed and the reaction becomes n^|;a1»ve. 

(6) The Sehnlta-Oliariton Beaetion. — ^The reaction of the 
tissues to scarlet fever toxin is to {uodnoe antitoxin. This is 
present in the blood of the scarlet fever patient for the first 
time about d^t days after the appearance of the rash, and 
may be detect for many years afW the attack. The blood 
serum of a convalescent injected intradermaUy into a recent 
scarlet fever rash wiU produce local blanching (the Schulta- 
Charlton reaction) in from dx to dght hours. Usually 0'2 o.o. 
of a 1 in 10 dilution of scarlet fever antitoxin is employed. 
Although a podtive result is pathognomonic, but late 

rashes or recent faint ones may fell to blanch, thus limiting the 
practical vtdue of the test. 

Trsaiment. — Scarlet fever antitoxin has a profound dieot 
upon the toxmmia of Uie disease. The dosage ranges from 
3,000 U.S.A. units intnmneoeiariy for the n^ case up to 
30,0(M units intraoenondff for the severdy toxic form. Ruiy 
administradon is all-important. Within tWve hours, tempera- 
te and pulse-rate the genwal qnmptome of toxmmia 
abate or are abolished, and the rash fiulM; dssqnamatimi 



18 iNVBcrnous diseases 

IB mmiiwal . In toxio oases the effects are dramatic. Anti* 
toxin has no direct effect on the inTasive (septic) features 
of tile disease, for which sulphonamides {vide p. 6) are 
indicated. 

The patient should be kept in bed for at least a forti^ht 
or longer in the more severe t 3 rpes. Milk diet should be given 
until the temperature baa fiiUen ; fish and minced meat may 
tiben be added. There is no advantage in maintaining a milk 
diet for three weeks, as was formerly advised, with a view to 
lessening the incidence of nephritis. An early return to a 
mixed diet does not increase the fiequency of this complication, 
tike management of which in no way differs from that required 
in acute nephritis of other causation. Acute polyartiiritis is 
tiieumatic and responds to saUcylates. Paracentesis may be 
required for otitis media. Osteomyelitis of the mastoid and 
long bones demands prompt surgical measures. 

Mode of Spread and Prevention. — Scarlet fever is a disease 
of relatively low infectivity. dose personal contact is usually 
necessary for its spread, but recently soiled articles may convey 
mfeotion. Many outbreaks as the result of drinking infected 
wiillr have been recorded, and this p(»sible source of infection 
must be eliminated. Convalescent and “ healthy ” carriers 
axe nmnerous. The convalescent carrier may give rise to 
“ return ” cases.* The specific (nganisms persist in the throat 
for at least four weeks and isolation should therefore be main- 
tained for this period. Desquamation may be safely ignored, 
but any breach of mucous membranes, rhinitis, or otorrhoea 
should be r^arded as possibly infective imtil the causal 
organism can be shown to be abront. Concurrent disinfection 
is important. Tmninal disinfBOtion should also be carried 
out. 

The Dick test may be performed on contacts and susceptibles 
be passively immunised by the injection of 1,500 to 3,000 
U.SA. units of scarlet fever antitoxin. Protection is secured 
within twenty-four hours and lasts for from ten to fourteen 
days but no longer. 

Active immunisation may be carried out by the injection 
at weekly intervals of graded numbers of skin test doses (s.t.d.) 
of scarlet fever toxin. To produce lasting immunity large 
doses are necessary. The Dicks begin with 650 and increase 
steadily up to 100,000 s.t.d. in the fifth and last injection. 
Smoe reactions may prove to be more severe than an attack 
of the disease, the procedure is only called for under special 
drcumstauces. 



DIPHTHERIA Id 


ERYSIPELAS 

AKi<dogy. — ^Erysipelaa is ui inflammation of the skin 
caused by the entrance of the hsemolytio streptococcus throng 
a breach of surface, such as a minute scratch or a wound. 
Prom this focus the organisms spread centrifdgally and may 
ultimately invade a wide area of skin or may penetrate to 
subcutaneous tissues producing the urgent surgical condition 
of cellvlUia. The organism can be cultivated readily from the 
sjxreading margin of the inflammatory process. All ages are 
liable to attack, but the disease is more serious in infants, 
the aged, and those debilitated by chronic diseases or 
intozioations such as alcoholism. 

Incubation Period. — ^From one to seven days are the common 
limits. 

Clinical Description. — In the great majority of cases, the 
face is the region affected. Invasion is abrupt and is attended 
by vomiting, shivering, possibly a rigor, p3nrexia, and genmal 
malaise. T^re is a sense of heat tmd smarting at the affected 
site which appears as a patch of dark rose-coloured er3dhema 
with a deflate raised edge. Sometimes blebs are present. 
The affected site feels hotter to the touch than the surrounding 
skin. There is some degree of enlargement and tenderness of 
the related lymphatic glands. The local condition rapidly 
extends and in severe oases the whole of the face may 
involved so that the eyes cannot be opened and the features 
are obliterated. Except at the extremes of age and in the 
debilitated, who may succumb to septic absorption and terminal 
pneumonia, the prognosis is good. 

Treatment. — ^The sulphonamide drugs are almost specific 
and have superseded the older meth(^ of treatment. To 
adults sulphanilamide, sulphapyridine, or sulphathiazole is 
given in doses of 1 grm. four-hourly for the first three da3^ and 
then reduced to half this amoimt for a week. The usri^ pre- 
cautions must be observed {vide p. 8). Locally, boracic 
fomentations may be ordered in addition but are not essential. 
Strict isolation and asepsis are imperative. 


DIPHTHERIA 


Stiolocy. — ^Diphtheria is a oo^opolitan but preventable 
disease which, though endemic in ail lai^ centres of population. 



20 


INlTECnOnS DISEASES 


partioularly those of industrial type, exhibits localised epidemic 
prevalence. Ontbreaks in schools and institutions, once of 
common occurrence, are now increasingly obviated by the 
immunisation of the susceptiblra. The disease is mainly preva- 
lent during the winter months. Inddence falls chiefly upon 
children up to the age of ten years. The number of oases 
occurring in children from ages five to ten exceeds those 
occurring in children imder five, a fact obviously correlated 
with the increased opportunities for infection occurring in those 
of school age. Diphtheria is uncommon in infants imder one 
year old, but the maximum case fatality occurs in children 
under five years of age. In childrmi imder ten years of age the 
sexes are fairly equally affected ; above that age females 
preponderate. 

Bacteriology. — The Ci/rynthaeterium diphtherice (Klebs- 
Loffler bacillus) includes the gravis, iniermedius, and mitis 
strains. The latter is the least virulent and is sometimes 
avirulent and, if so, incapable of causing the disease. The 
bacillus is found in the false membrane characteristic of the 
disease, and in the throat and nose of convalescents and of a 
proportion of healthy people. The organism is a non-motile, 
gram-positive, non-spormg aerobe which produces a soluble 
exotoxin possessing special afflnity for heart muscle and nervous 
tissue. 

Pathology. — ^The false membrane varies in appearance and 
thickness according to its age and situation. It occurs in its 
most typical form upon the tonsils, the pillars of the fauces, 
uvula, and soft palate. It occurs alro upon the epiglottis, and 
may extend within the larynx partirdly occluding the glottis. 
The trachea and bronchi may be invaded, and the membrane 
may be detached from these structures in the form of a oast 
or mould. The membrane itself is the result of a combination 
of fibrinous exudation firom, and necrosis of, the superficial 
layers of the underlying mucous membrane. 

Broncho-pneumonia is a common terminal event in the 
laryngeal form, either as the result of the direct spread of 
membrane downwards or of infection by secondary organisms. 
Although generalised, the effects of toxin upon the muscular 
and conductive tissues of the heart are most evident. The 
naked eye changes are those of acute myocarditis. Mioro- 
scopioally, the bundle of His (aurioulo-ventricular bundle) may 
be seen, on occasion, to be virtually disorganised. There are 
no charaoteristio naked-eye changes in nervous tissue. 

Ineubation Period. — ^Usually ^m two to four days. 

Cflhiieel Types. — Diphtheria may be classified according to 



DIPHTHERIA 


21 


the utuation of the membrane. The following are tihe com- 
monest sites : (a) tonsillar, ( 6 ) pharyngeal, (e) anterior nasal, 
{d) laryngeal. Membrane may also occur upon the conjunctiva, 
ibe sl^, and wounds ; diphtheria of the middle ear is of 
uncommon occurrmioe. 

TonatUar and Pharyngeal Diphteria . — ^The onset is fre- 
quently insidious, especially in children. There may be nothing 
to dir^ attention to the throat until the disease is weU 
established, and this is an important factor in its.uimecessarily 
high mortality. The child appears, to be poorly, pale, tired, and 
dispirited, ^e temperature is only sightly raised, but the 
pulw is rapid and of low tension. Vomiting is less common 
than in scarlet fever. Examination of the throat by the time 
the practitioner is called usually shows a definite membrane. 
In tonsillar diphtheria this is generally first visible upon one 
or both tonsils as a patch of gre3ri8h-white colour with well- 
defined edges. The membrane is definitely growing upon the 
surface of the tonsil, mid surrounding it may be a zone of 
h3^rsemia. It is firmly adherent to the underlying tissue, 
but can be pulled off and leaves a bleeding surface. In pharyn- 
geal diphtheria membrane is more extensive, invading, in 
addition to the tonsils, other parts of the pharynx. 

If treatment is delayed, the membrane tends to spread 
and its colour to become darker owing to the presence of altered 
blood, and later owing to necrotic changes. There may be 
characteristio fcetor and oedema of the ton^ and uvula. Some 
d^p«e of cervical adenitis and periadenitis, except in very mild 
cases, is usual. In the hyxiertoxic or “ malignant ” type of case 
this may be so pronounc^ as to give rise to the appearance — 
always of very grave prognostic import — ^known as “ bull-neck.” 
Albuminuria is frequent, but not constant, at the onset of 
diphtheria. 

Anterior Naaal Diphtheria . — Though frequently associated 
with faucial infection, nasal diphthuia often occurs alone. 
Owing to its insidious course it may pass unrewgnised for 
perhaps weeks, during which i>eriod t^ affected child dis- 
seminates the disease. Typical luuial diphtheria is characterised 
by a yellowish, blood-st^ed disohaige from one or both 
nostrils. Examination within the anterior paxes may reveal 
a patch of membrane on the inner or outer walls, or the nares 
may be ooduded by the presence of membrane. Often, however, 
the membrane may be situated too fax back to be seen by 
ordinary methods of examination. Frequently the skia bel< 
the nostrils is excoriated. Hie child, uthou^ not definih 
ill, is usually out of condition. A foreign l^y in the nose 



22 mFBcnous diseases 

may prodnoe a blood-stained nasal discharge which may 
simulate nasal d4>hthetia. Occasionally, too, ^e disease may 
arise in conjunction with a foreign body. 

iMryngecH Diphiheria . — ^This may bo primary, but more 
often it is secondary to the faucial form. 1316 symptoms are 
caused by mechanical obstruction of the glottis by membrane 
and inflammatory swelling. The condition is most liable to 
occur in children under five years of age. In infants the onset 
of obvious laryngeal obstruction may be rapid ; in older 
children there is usually a phase of noisy breathing with a 
harsh “ croupy ” cough. Inspiratory stridor occurs. As the 
condition advances, inspiratory embarrassment becomes urgent ; 
the accessory muscles of respiration come into play, and there is 
recession of the lower ribs. Cyanosis, taohyoar^, and rest- 
lessness are prominent symptoms. Any considerable degree of 
obstruction renders sleep impossible and the patient becomes 
rapidly exhausted. If no relief is afforded, death takes place 
firom asphyxia. 

CompUcatioru. — ^The complications of diphtheria, with the 
exception of broncho-pneumonia in the laryngeal form, and 
the rare post-diphtheritic hemiplegia, are due to the effects 
of the toxin upon heml muscle and nervous tissues. Paralysis 
due to diphtheria may commence about the second or third 
week or be delayed considerably later. In the hypertoxic 
type cardisM} failure and paralysis occur early. 

Cardiac Invdlvemeni . — ^Myocardial damage varies greatly in 
degree but is the corrunonest cause of death. “ Early ” car^c 
failure may occur as the terminal phase of the initial generalised 
toxaemia. “ Late ” cardiac failure may occur at any time after 
the initial phase has passed, most commonly about the fifteenth 
day. It is characterised by vomiting, subnormal temperature, 
epigastric pain, an alteration in the character of the first 
hei^ sound, and enlargement of the liver. Heart block may 
occur at any stage and may be transient ; it is especially 
common and serious in degree in late cardiac failure. Vomiting 
is a danger signal ; deatili may follow in a few hours or a 
few days. In “ convalescence ” extra-systoles may occur, but 
in themselves are of no prognostic significance ; as occasional 
heralds of more serious lesions, they should be regarded with 
caution. 

The following, alone or in any combination, are the com- 
monest varieties of diphtheritio paralysis, the pathogenesis of 
whidi is discussed on^ge 950. 

Palatal. — This is umially the earliest as well as the 
oommcmeBt ; the rigns aie nasal voice, regurgitation of fluids 



DIPHTHEBIA 23 

through the nose, loss or limitation of morepent, and anffistheeia 
of the soft palate. The oondition is tisually bilatend. 

Pharyngeoil Paralysis. — ^This is an extension of the palatal 
paralysis and is in^oated by dysphagia, a oharaoteristio 
pharyngeal ” oough, and the escape of s^va from the angles 
of the mouth. 

Ocular. — (a) Extrinsic : strabismus is common, ptosis rare ; 
(6) intrinsic : paralysis of accommodation which is subjective 
and of short duration is relatively common, but in children, 
at least, often passes unnoticed, though adrdts may find them- 
selves unable to read small print. The pupils continue to react 
to light, and frequently to accommodation also. 

Intercostal Paralysis is shown by immobility of the costal 
walls during respiration, associated with increased respiratory 
excursions of the upper abdomen. 

Diaphragmatic paralysis is the most fatal type. There is 
partial or complete immobility of the upper abdomen, together 
with increased respiratory excursions of the costal walls. The 
mortality from this type of paralysis is very high ; if combined 
with intercostal pai^ysis the outlook is virtually hopeless. 
Paralysis of the diaphiagm may be of short duration, and it is 
occasionally possible, by the continuous administration of 
oxygen and artificial respiration, to tide the patient over the 
period of its duration. The use of some type of “ breathing 
machine ” has greatly improved the prognosis and has also 
shown that the condition may endure for as long as two weeks 
with ultimate recovery. Amongst the rarer forms of post- 
diphtheritic pualysis ate adductor and abductor laryngeal 
paralysis and pareses of various groups of muscles, e.g., facial. 

A generali^ peripheral neuritis involving the arms and 
legs may occur five weeks or so after the onset of diphtheria. 
It resembles other forms of peri^dieral neuritis, and the outlook 
as r^ards complete recovery is favourable (vide p. 952). 

IHagnosis. — ^Early diagnosis followed by spe<^o treatment 
is all-important if life is to be saved. The majority of cases of 
diphtheria can and should be diagnosed upon ohnioal grounds. 
Valuable time may be lost if patients with suspected diphtheria 
be deprived of treatment pending baoteriolc^cal oonfinnation. 
Bacteriological investigations are importaiut chiefly as an 
aooesso^ or coirfirmatory procedure. The bacteriologist can 
report only upon the presence or absence of diphtheria bacilli ; 
it is for the physidan to make a diagnosis, to be confirmed later 
by the bact^ologist. It must be realis:d that the presence of 
di{ditheria badlli does not necessarily mean that the patient 
is suffering from diphtheria. In taking a swab care must be 



24 INFEOnOUS DISEASES 

exerdaed to see that it is rubbed firmly over the suspeoted area. 
Needless to-eay, in every case of true diphlheria virvdent bacilli 
are present in the membrane, althouf^ not always recovered. 

The differential didgnoaie of tonsillar and pharyngeal 
diphtheria may be very difficult. Sixeptocoocal tonsillitis 
may inodooe a membnme which closely resembles that of 
diphtheria, but in the former condition ^ere is, as a rule, a 
more obvious inflammatory condition of the throat. Vincent’s 
angina produces ulceration, sometimes disguised by the over- 
lying membrane. Patches of thrush in the mouths of infants 
choidd readily be distinguished. Its irregular distribution 
upon any part of the buccal mucous membrane, dead whiteness, 
easy removal, and the presence of the monilia albicans are the 
characteristic diagnostic points. 

As already noted, lar 3 mgesl diphtheria is usually secondary 
to the faucial form, and this fact is an aid to diagnosis ; the 
condition is practically confined to infants and young children. 
It must be differentiated from laryngismus stridulus, and the 
wheezing of bronchial asthma. Sometimes the severe catarrhal 
laryngitis occurring at the end of the prodromal stage of measles 
may produce considerable laryngeal obstruction. Scalding 
fluids and impacted foreign bodies produce obstruction 
suddenly ; a hi^iy of the accident is usually obtainable. In 
infants, retropharyngeal abscess is a possible source of error. 
Among adults such conditions as hysteria, syphilis, or tuber- 
culosis are occasionally misdiagnosed as huyngeal diphtheria. 
The combination of lai^uigeal and bronchopneiunonic diphtheria 
and the pressure of enlarged tracheobronchial glands and of 
neoplasms gives rise to stridor, which is both inspiratory and 
expiratory. 

Treatment. — The essentials of tieatment consist in the 
administration of an adequate dose of antitoxin at the earliest 
possible moment and abmlute rest in bed. The mechanical 
obstruction which occnis in laryngeal diphtheria may, in 
addition, necessitate relief by intubation or tracheotomy. 

Antitoxin was first employed in England in 1896. Its use 
was attooded by a dramatic ^ in the case mortality from the 
disease, which immediatdy fell £n>m 30 pm* cent, or more to 
20 per cent, or less, and has continued to show a progressive 
drop to the present level of 6 or 6 per cent. Othm’ causes 
have contributed, but the outstanding reason for the decline is, 
without any doubt, the increased employment of antitoxin in 
adequate doses. Its effects are seen in the alleviation of the 
toxmmia, and in the cessation of the spread and the early 
s^azatiicm of the membrane. 



26 


DIPHTHERIA 

Whimever possible the highly refined globnlin-modified 
(protein-digeBted) sera shotild be used. These products may 
contain 6,000 units or more of antitoxin in 1 c.c. Since they 
are virtually protein-free, serum reactions are rare. 

Dotage . — ^Dosage is baeed upon the extent and apparent 
age of the membrane and the indications of existing toxaemia. 

dose for a child must nerer be smaller t^n that for an 
adult. Better results axe obtained firom a large initial dose 
than firom repeated smaller ones. Too large a dose is hardly 
possible ; too small a one easily so. Give antitoxin on 
tutpicion. Beyond possible sensitisation, no harm can result 
if the suspicion prove ultimately to be unfounded. Never 
withhold antitoxin while membrane, however old, is still 
present. The following approximate scale of initial doses, 
increased later if necessary, will be found adequate except 
for the severely toxic case which requires intensive treat- 
ment : — 


Extent of membrane . 

(*) 

One TomdL 

(fr) 

Both Tonaila. 

(e) 

Both TonsUs 
with 

Pharynx or Liarynx. 

Age of membrane in hoora . 

24 

48 

72 

24 

48 

72 

24 

48 

72 

Antitoxin in l,000*i of units 

8 

16 

24 

16 

32 

48 

32 

48 

96 


For primary nasal diphtheria 8,000 to 16,000 unite and for 
primary laryngeal diphtheria 16,000 to 32,000 units axe usually 
sufficient, toxsemia being but slight. 

BotUe . — ^Intxamusoulax injection into the outer side of the 
thigh is the best for routine practice. Absorption is too 
slow alter subcutaneous injection. Intravenous injection of 
the whole or a portion of the dose is indicated if this exceeds 
20,000 unite, l^vided that the serum is given sloaiy at blood 
heat, administration being instantly stopp^ upon any sign of 
collapse, it may be injected unMuted into the vein. The 
intraperitoneal route is an alternative in the case of young 
ohild^ with collapsed veins. Oral administration is absolutely 

In laryngeal diphtheria, unless the patient be obviously in 
need of surgical interference when first seen, antitoxin should 
be given forthwith. A steam kettle is oftw used. Failure 
to improve within a reasonable time, increasing stridor and 
embanassment of the right heart, and restlessness indicate 



26 


INFECfnOUS DISEASES 


the necessity for mechanical suction through the direct laryngo- 
scope, intubation or tracheotomy. The first two procedures 
are only suitable for hospital practice ; the last is the method 
to be employed by the practitioner. 

Once operation is decided ui>on, the sooner it is performed 
the better. 

Absolute rest is essential. The patient should remain flat 
for a week and then be allowed a piDow a week up to three 
weeks ; then after a week on a couch, walking may be begun 
cautiously. In toxic cases it is essential to give glucose, 20 
grm. in 60 c.c. of normal saline intravenously, if possible, and 
then 4 to 5 oz. diluted in lemonade during each of the first 
ten days. If not tolerated by the mouth it must be given 
rectally. Careful watch must be kept upon the heart and for 
signs of paralysis. Palatal and pharyngeal paralysis may 
necessitate nasal feeding. Late cardiac failure is to be treated 
by raising the foot of the bed to obviate the occurrence of cere- 
bral anaemia, a return to glucose, intravenously, if possible, or 
by the rectum, and the injection of adrenalin. A minute dose of 
morphia ( .^V ^ rV gr.) hypodermically is frequently of the utmost 
value in allaying the fatal restlessness and the distressing 
vomiting and epigastric pain of myocardial failure. Alcohol 
and strychnine are of doubtful value in diphtheria. Niketh- 
amide (coramine) is of more use. Digitalis tends itself to produce 
heart-block. 

The palsies usually clear up spontaneously ; massage and 
electrical treatment for the arms and legs are seldom required. 

Convalescence must not be hurried, and there must be a 
cautious return to school or occupation. 

Mode of Spread and Prevention. — The carrier plays an 
important part in the spread of diphtheria. In industrial centres 
5 per cent, or more of the population harbour virulent diphtheria 
bacilli in the nose or throat, either temporarily or over longer 
periods. Such “ healthy ” carriers may be incubating the 
disease, may be or become immune, but are none the less 
carriers, who may convey the specific organisms to others, 
especially in schools and dormitories. 

After an attack of the disease the patient remains, for a 
varying period, a “ convalescent ’’ carrier. Most patients 
undergo spontaneous bacteriological clearance by or before 
the time they are clinically fit for discharge. The carrier 
state is likely to be maintained by an unhealthy nasopharynx, 
and in such a case surgical measures afford the best means of 
securing bacteriological clearance. Before release of a patient 
from isolation it is usual to obtain two or three consecutive 



DIPHTHERIA 


27 


negative swabbings from the nose and throat at intervals, 
preferably of a week. The organisms in the chronic carrier 
state should from time to time be submitted to a test for 
virulence. There is no justification for segregating a carrier of 
avindent diphtheria bacilli. 

The Schick Test discriminates between those who are sus- 
ceptible and those who are not susceptible to an attack of 
clinical diphtheria ; it is a test of antitoxic immunity not of 
infection. Diluted diphtheria toxin-filtrate is used containing 
in 0*2 c.c. one-fiftieth part of the minimum lethal dose (M.L.D.) 
for a guinea-pig. This amount is injected intradermally into 
one forearm. A precisely similar amount of toxin-filtrate, 
inactivated by heat, is injected into the other forearm. This 
acts as a control. If a control is not employed confusion may 
result because of the occurrence of pseudo-reactions due to 
sensitiveness to bacterial proteins. These are rare in children 
under eight years of age, but in older children and adults 
less rare. 

The following readings of the test are possible ; (o) Negative : 
nothing is seen on either arm except the needle punctures. 
(6) Positive : the test arm shows an oval or circular patch of 
erythema, which later pigments and desquamates, the control 
arm nothing, (c) “ Pseudo ” {negative) : areas of erythema of 
identical appearance on both forearms disappearing in tweaty- 
four to forty-eight hours. This is equivalent to a negative 
reaction, (d) “ Pseudo ” plus positive : on both arms an area 
of erythema appears, but that upon the test arm is larger than 
that upon the control arm, and presents an iimer portion of 
deeper red ; in twenty-four to forty -eight hours the control 
arm is clear and the “ pseudo ” element has disappeared from 
the test arm, leaving an ordinary positive test. The pseudo 
plus positive test is the most difficult of the four possible results 
to re^ correctly. 

The Schick test properly carried out with reliable, recently 
diluted toxin, and correctly read, possesses a high degree of 
accuracy. The results of the test show that only about 15 
per cent, of new-born infants are susceptible to diphtheria, 
while the remaining 86 per cent, possess temporary immunity 
transmitted from the mother. Within six months of birth this 
transmitted immunity'disappears, and the maximum percentage 
of positive Schick teste is found between the ages of six monijis 
and two 3 ^ear 8 . Among adults the percentage of Schick positive 
reactions is lower than among chfldren, and is usually about 
30 per cent. The poorer the circumstanoee, and the more 
crowded the environment, the higher is the percentage of 



28 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

negative reactors at all ages. This is due to the greater 
opportunities for the reception of small immunising doses of 
tl^ infection. 

ImmuniscUion, — The detection of a non-immune should be 
followed by his protection against the disease. Immunisation 
may be (i) passive, (ii) active, or (iii) combined passive and active, 
as recently employed, 

(i) Passive Immunisation is an emergency measure suitable 
for immediate contacts. The injection of from 500 to 2,000 
units of antitoxin quickly affords protection for a period of 
two or three weeks. 

(ii) Active Immunisation, the procedure of choice, takes 
much longer to produce, but has the advantage of enduring 
for at any rate some years. It should not be regarded as an 
emergency measure, but as a regular procedure for the protection 
of susceptible children, comparable to vaccination against 
smallpox. The importance of immunisation is greatest in the 
case of children of pre-school age, but the procedure should also 
be adopted for all susceptible children of school age, and also 
for adults, such as hospital nurses who are specially exposed. 
Since most young children are Schick positive and therefore 
susceptible, a preliminary test may be omitted in their case, 
but for older children and adults it should always be done, not 
only because many are already immune and so do not require 
art^cial immunisation, but because the occurrence of a 
pseudo -[-positive reaction is an indication of sensitivity to the 
prophyla^ic (vide infra). 

The prophylactics used in Great Britain are toxoid combined 
with alum — alum-precipitated toxoid (A.P.T.) and toxoid- 
antitoxin floccules (T.A.F.). (Toxoid is toxin treated with 
formalin and thus deprived of its toxic but not of its specific 
antigenic properties.) Both are potent prophylactics ; A.P.T. 
is usually employed for children imder eight among whom it 
provokes but few reactions ; T.A.P, is reserved for older 
children and adults, since it rarely gives rise to reactions at 
any age. For pseudo + positive Schick reactors and those who 
have reacted strongly to a small preliminary dose of A.P.T., 
T.A.P. should be used. At least two doses of the prophylactic 
are necessary. Suitable doses of A.P.T. are 0*2 c.c. and 0*3 
or 0*5 c.c. injected intramuscularly at an interval of four 
weeks ; of T.A.F., three doses of 1 c.c. at intervals of not less 
than two weeks. As a check upon results, Schick tests should 
be done three months after the last dose. Positive reactors 
receive a further injection, and this is also advisable for young 
children attaining school age. No certificate of immunity 



M KASLES 29 

should be issued unless a recent Schick test is known to be 
negative. 

(iii) Passive and Active Immunisation . — Clinical diphtheria 
has been treated successfully by a combination of antitoxin and 
toxoid, the antigenic stimulus of the latter augmenting the 
antitoxic content of the blood. Recently, combined active 
and passive immunisation has been advocated for the control 
of school outbreaks. 


MEASLES 

{MorbiUi) 

iEtiology. — Measles occurs all over the world and is endemic 
in large cities where, in alternate years, it assumes rapid and 
widespread epidemic prevalence. Commencing in the late 
autumn, the height of the epidemic is usually attained during 
the first quarter of the year ; by the end of the second quarter 
the epidemic ceases. Among children under five and especially 
imder three years of age, concomitant broncho-pneumonia is 
the cause of many deaths ; over the age of five this comphcation 
is much less common and much less fatal. Infante under 
three months of age very rarely contract measles. Since few 
reach adult life without having suffered an attack, with resulting 
active immunity, the mother, as a rule, confers placentally 
transmitted passive immunity upon the infant. This immunity 
persists for the first three months of life. It then wanes gnidually 
and by the eighth month, or earlier, is at an end. Thereafter, 
the infant is Ifighly susceptible to measles. 

Bacteriology. — The causal agent of measles is a filterable 
virus. Common concomitant organisms, to which the com- 
plications of the disease are due, are the haemolytic 
streptococcus, the pneumococcus, and the B. influenzce of 
Pfeiffer. 

Pathology. — ^There are no post-mortem changes charac- 
teristic of the disease. The pathological appearances at autopsy 
are those due to the complications. The chief of these, and 
the one most likely to kiU, is broncho-pneumonia. 

Incubation Period. — Ten to eleven days to the appearance 
of catarrhal symptoms ; fourteen days to the rash. 

Clinical Description. — ^The prodromal stage of measles lasts 
for three or four days. It is a febrile catarrhal period char- 
acterised by congestion of mucous membranes and the presence 
of Koplik’s spots. The signs and symptoms of this period are 



30 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

grouped together as the enanthem. The period of the enanthem 
is followed by that of the exanthem or rash. 

The child at first seems to have a cold with sneezing and 
running at the eyes and nose as prominent features ; photo- 
phobia, epistaxis, and diarrhoea may occur. A few hours after 
the onset the temperature rises to between 99®-100° F. Next 
day the catarrhal conditions persist, and a short, hard cough 
develops. The temperature continues to rise, with slight 
remissions, up to perhaps 104® F., until the full development 
of the rash. Only when this begins to fade does the temperatxu« 
drop, either gradually or with some suddenness. 

On examination of the buccal cavity during the prodromal 
stage, general reddening of the mucous membrane will be 
not^, with perhaps a blotchy appearance of the soft palate. 
Most important, as being 'paOtognomonic of the disease, is the 
presence of Koplik’s spote. 

Koplik's Spots. — ^These are to be detected in more than 90 
per cent, of cases of measles examined in the prodromal stage. 
They may be present as long as five days before the appearance 
of the rash, and are thus not only of diagnostic but of prophy- 
lactic importance, as their detection permits of the early segrega- 
tion of the patient with the certainty that he has measles. 

Koplik’s spots are nearly always bilateral. They appear 
upon the buccal mucous membrane at the level of the premolar 
teeth and around the papilla of Stensen’s duct (parotid duct). 
They must be sought for by gently retracting the angle of the 
mouth with a spatula and examining in oblique light, preferably 
daylight. Koplik’s spots are made up of a central portion 
which has been hkened to a grain of salt in appearance, set 
upon an erythematous base. The spots may be few in number, 
or so closely set as to give the mucous membrane of the affected 
area the “ matt ” appearance of ground glass. They are 
detachable with diflBculty. They have usually disappeared by 
the time that the rash is fully developed. 

The Rash. — ^This first appears at the junction of the hair 
with the forehead and behind the ears. It spreads in regular 
order over the face, trunk and limbs, palms of the hands, and 
soles of the feet. The primary lesion is a macule or maoulo- 
papule the size of a lentil or smaller, and of dull reddish colour. 
The individual macules as they appear soon coalesce into 
blotchy areas, which frequently present a crescentic margin. 
The skin is normal between the blotches, but these may become 
confluent over some portions of the body, giving the appearance 
of an erythema superficially resembling that of scarlet fever. 
The rash having attained its full development, which may take 



MEASLES 


31 


twenty -four to thirty-six hours, gradually fades, leaving blotchy 
staining which is at first purplish and later brown in colour. 
This staining is usually most marked upon the abdomen. 
Desquamation of branny type occurs. Prodromal rashes of 
either scarlatiniform or morbilliform type are not infiequent 
and are irregular in distribution and fleeting in character. 
Measles may be confined to the prodromal stage, the rash never 
appea.fing, or the rash may abort. Haemorrhagic measles is 
fortunately rare ; it is invariably fatal. 



Fio. 1 


Temperature chart of an unoomplicated case of measles 
in child of two and a half years. Exi>o8ur8 to infection 
was eleven days before onset of symptoms. 

Complications. — ^The enanthem of measles affects the 
mucous membrane of the whole of the respiratory tract. A 
moderate degree of hoarseness at the height of the stage of 
enanthem is not unusual, and some degree of bronchitis may 
be regarded as a normal feature of the disease. 

The chief complications of measles are as follows : — 

1. Catarrhal Laryngitis so severe as to cause recession of 
the lower ribs may occur towards the end of the prodromal 
period. The condition, although it may appear alarming, 
commonly subsides as the rash develops. Laryngeal diphtheria 
as a secondary infection may occur at any stage of measles, 
and must be differentiated from the catarrhal form. 

2. Broncho- Pneumonia is the chief and most fatal com- 
plication of measles, while lobar pneumonia is much less 




32 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


common. Empyema may follow either. Failure of the 
temperature to fall after the full appeaianoe of the rash 
should lead to a careful examination of the lungs and the 
ear-drums. 

3. Enteritis, due possibly to infection of the bowel by muco- 
pus which has been swallowed, may occur in infants early or 
late and add to the gravity of the illness. 

4. Oaular Complications. — ^The conjunctivitis of the pro- 
dromal stage is commonly associated with photophobia. 
Phlyctenular conjunctivitis and comeal ulcers leaving opacities, 
are not uncommon, particularly in debUitated children, as are 
blepharitis and styes. 

6. Otitis Media, occurring in the course of measles, is one 
of the commonest causes of dea&ess or deafinutism in children. 
Careful watch for mastoiditis is essential. 

6. Cancrum Oris and Noma are the terms applied to a rapid 
gangrenous destruction of the tissues of the cheek and vulva 
respectively. The infection, which is similar to that causing 
Vincent’s Angina {vide p. 601), rarely occurs except in neglected, 
debilitated cMdren. Treated at once, the condition may respond 
to local applications of neoarsphenamine in glycerine : later, 
injections of this drug and excision of the affected tissue may 
be necessary. 

7. Encephalitis, similsu: to that associated with other acute 
infections {vide p. 855), has occurred in some recent epidemics. 

Measles may be associated with whooping-cough or diph- 
theria, less commonly with scarlet fever. Like whooping-cough, 
measles may initiate pulmonary fibrosis or light up a latent 
tuberculous focus. 

Diagnosis. — ^In the catarrhal stage the detection of Koplik’s 
spots clinches the diagnosis. These must not be confused with 
aphthous patches, or small ulcers of the buccal mucous mem- 
brane of dental or gastro-intestinal origin. The severe catarrhal 
laryngitis which may occur towards the end of the prodromal 
period is not uncommonly diagnosed as laryngeal diphtheria 
{vide p. 22). The rash of measles has to be distinguished 
fix)m tho.se of rubella and scarlet fever. The rash of scarlet 
fever does not occur on the face in punctate form, and the 
drcumoral region is always spared. On the arms and legs, 
however, it is sometimes coarse and almost blotchy, and may 
be confused with that of measles. In rubella the colour of the 
rash is distinctively pink {vide p. 35). Occasionally, a serum 
rash may have a morbilliform character, but urticarial wheals 
are practically always to be seen upon some portion of the 
body. Certain drug rashes, notably that due to copaiba, may 



MEASLES 33 

be confused. The tongue in measles may, on occasion, closely 
simulate the “ strawberry tongue ” of scarlet fever. 

Treatment. — Bed, an abundance of fresh air, an aperient, 
and light diet until the temperature has settled are the main 
requisites. The hygiene of the mouth, nose, and eyes is of 
great importance. If the cough proves troublesome, some 
simple sedative mixture is indicated. Complications must be 
treated as they arise. Sulphonamides are indicated for those 
due to secondary bacterial infections ; these are due chiefly 
to haemolytic streptococci. 

Mode ol Spread. — With the exception of chickenpox and 
smallpox, measles is the most infective of the “ fevers.’' The 
maximum degree of infectivity is present in the prodromal 
stage. At this stage measles may not only be conveyed by 
personal contact, but may be spread for short distances through 
the air, e.gr., from bed to bed. The buccal and nasal secretions 
are highly infective during the catarrhal period, but infectivity 
rapidly wanes after the appearance of the rash, and by the 
time that the latter has faded may be considered to have 
ceased. Articles freshly soiled by secretions in the early stages 
of the disease may transmit infection. 

Prevention. — Unfortimately, the prodromal stage of measles 
is rarely recognised except in institutional epidemics. When 
once the rash has appear^ and the disease is recognised it is 
too late by the isolation of the first case to prevent others. 

Since measles is very much less fatal to children over five 
years of age, any method which will postpone the almost 
inevitable attack until infancy has passed result in the 
saving of many lives. The virus, grown on chick-embryos, 
has been used for active immunisation upon a small scale with 
a measure of success. Injections of the pooled serum of 
convalescents or of adults who have had measles, parental whole 
blood, and placental extract (human immune globulin), although 
without specific therapeutic value, are successfully employed 
for either of two prophylactic measures — (a) Sero-prevention : 
injected within the first five days after exposure, human serum, 
by conferring temporary passive immunity, prevents the attack 
in a high percentage of those exposed and injected ; (6) sero- 
attenualion : serum injected within the first five days of 
exj> 08 ure in half the dose used for prevention modifies the 
expected attack. Unless too highly modified, permanent 
active immunity results from this modified attack. 

Donors must be shown to be free from syphilis and 
their serum must be pooled and tested for sterility by the 
bacteriologist. Batches of pooled serum, especially adult- 



34 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


serum, vary widely in protective value. The donors must be 
young ; serum derived from the elderly may have Uttle value. 
In any case, and especially for prevention, adult serum is 

I— CxbOtVYC lOfc.adwItitnwgne 

r i 


■n El d ra - m ga m jfm um 


Fio. 2 

Diagram of measles attenuated by injection of adult-immune serum. Note 
prolonged incubation period and attack of trifling severity, resulting in active 

immunity. 

inferior to recent convalescent serum and should be injected 
in at least double the dose. Placental extract (immune globulin) 
has approximately the same value as adult serum and, if 
supplies of the latter are scanty, may replace it. Placental 
extract sometimes causes thermal reactions. For healthy 
children, attenuation is to be preferred ; for others, prevention. 
The following scale of doses is suggested for children under 
three years of age : — 


Dose under three years, Ist to r>th day after exposure. 

Prevention. Attenuation. 

Convalescent scrum . . 6 c.c. 2-5 c.c. 

Adult scrum . , . j 10 „ 6*0 „ 

Parental blood . . . ... 10 to 1.^) „ 

For children over tiircc tlicHC doftes hhould be doubled. 

The dose of placenkil extract is 2 c.c. for children up to two 
years of age. This dose is increased by 0-25 c.c. for each ye«ir 
of age up to a maximum of 4 c.c. 

Parental whole blood may be withdrawn from cither parent 
who may be immune and injected intramuscularly at once. 
The dose for attenuation in children under three is from 10 to 
15 c.c. injected into the buttocks. 

The disease is in its most highly infective period during the 
whole of the catarrhal period, and isolation commenced only 
when this period has passed is of greatly diminiBbad value. 
A period of isolation of nine days, from four days before to five 
days after the appearance of the rash is sufficient. Exposed 


IOO®F 

y_ j<o|>iuc* 
V 

\ vt.sk 




RUBELLA 


36 


susceptible children should be kept under observation for 
fourteen days, or seventeen days if serum-prophylaxis has been 
employed, since attenuation may lengthen the incubation 
period. 


RUBELLA 
{Oerman Measles) 

iEtiology. — Rubella is a disease of trifling severity and 
world- wide distribution. In Great Britain it occurs in epidemic 
form in the spring and early summer. It affects children above 
the age of infancy and yoimg adults. The causal organism is 
unknown. The disease is much less infective than measles. 

Incubation Period. — From fourteen to nineteen days, 
occasionally twenty-one daya. Common periods are seventeen 
or eighteen days. 

Clinical Description. — In children there may be no appre- 
ciable prodromal period, the appearance of the rash being the 
first indication of anything abnormal. Adults, however, may 
complain of headache, slight sore throat, general malaise, and 
stiffness of the neck for twenty-four hours or so before the 
appearance of the rash. The prodromal period, if present, is 
always of short duration. Slight conjunctival injection may 
occur, and occasionally slight coryza and cough. Koplik’s 
spots are not present. There may be a moderate rise of 
temperature to 101®-102° F. which may persist for two or 
three days. There is an increase of Tiirck and plasma cells in 
the blood. 

The rash, which sometimes produces itching, consists of 
pink macules ranging in size from a pin’s head to a lentil 
and occasionally palpable to the finger, appears first, as a rule, 
upon the face, including the circumoral area, next upon the 
trunk, and last upon the limbs. This order is not invariable ; 
it may be reversed. It is common for the rash to fade from the 
site at which it first appeared before erupting elsewhere. The 
macules may remain discrete or they may coalesce into blotches 
which lack the crescentic margins seen in measles. They may 
remain discrete in one area and become confluent or “ scarla- 
tiniform ” in others. The rash is usually most typical upon the 
adductor aspect of the thigh and upon the dorsiun of the foot. 
The colour of the rash, whatever its type and distribution, is 
neither the dull red of measles nor the bright red of sc€u:let 
fever, but definitely pink. By the second or third day after 
its appearance the rash fades. If it has been intense, faint 



36 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

yellowish discolorations, quite different from the staining left 
by the measles rash, may be noted ; these soon disappear. 
There may be scanty desquamation of “ branny ** type. 
Palpable enlargement of the posterior cervical and sub -occipital 
glands and sometimes of the axillary, epitrochlear and inguinal 
groups is common. Neuralgic and “ rheumatic ” pains and mild 
encephalitis have occurred as complications. Deaths ascribed 
to rubella are probably due to some concurrent condition. 

Diagnosis. — The diseases with which rubella is most likely to 
be confused are measles, scarlet fever, the roseolar rash of 
secondary syphilis, and glandular fever (infective mononucleosis). 

(а) Measles, — The definite prodromal period of three to 
four days, the well-marked coryza, conjunctivitis, and the 
appearance of Koplik's spots during this period should serve 
to prevent confusion with rubella. The rash of measles is dull 
red in colour, as compared with the pink of rubella. 

(б) Scarlet Fever, — The scarlatiniform phase of rubella is 
constantly mistaken for mild scarlet fever. Points in favour 
of the latter are a sudden onset with sore throat and vomiting, 
tachycardia out of proportion to the pyrexia, and the appearance 
twenty-four to thirty -six hours after onset of the typical rash 
commencing at the neck and spreading in regular fashion 
downwards. If in doubt, the Schultz-Charlton reaction should 
be i)erformed {vide p. 17), and swabbings from the fauces 
plated on blood-agar {vide p. 16). 

(c) Secondary Syphilis, — The history, other signs of 
secondary syphilis such as snail-track ulcers on the fauces, 
alopecia, antcraia, and the Wassermann reaction should prevent 
this very serious mistake. The rash of rubella appears first on 
the face, vhile in secondary syphilis the face escapes. The 
rash of rubella is sometimes irritating ; the eruptions of 
secondary 83 rphili 8 , on the other hand, do not itch. Both 
conditions are associated with enlargement of groups of 
lymphatic glands. 

(d) Glandular Fever is occasionally associated with a 
roseolar rash. The sub-steriiomastoid glands are those typically 
affected. They may attain the size of pltims. In half the 
cases the spleen is palpable. There is 7w anaemia. The blood 
picture shows characteristic monocytes. 

Treatment. — Bed, an aperient, and light diet for a few days 
constitute the only treatment necessary. 

Prevention. — Rubella, owing to its long incubation period 
and indefinite onset, may give rise to administrative diflSculties 
in institutional outbreaks. Infectivity is of short duration. 
Isolation is only necessary until the rash has faded ; five days 



WHOOPING-COUGH 37 

are ample, as a rule. Concurrent disinfection of everything 
soiled by the patient is essential. 


WHOOPING-COUGH 

{Pertussis) 

iEtiology. — Whooping-cough is now the most serious of the 
endemic specific infections of children living in large towns. 
This is due to (i) the high incidence among infants, although 
no age is exempt ; (ii) the duration and debilitating character 
of the illness ; and (iii) the liability, at any stage, to concomitant 
broncho -pneumonia ; (iv) the danger of permanent damage to 
the limgs. The disease is most prevalent in the early spring, 
when broncho -pneumonia is also rife ; it tends to attain 
epidemicity every other year, sometimes concurrently with 
measles. The HcRtnophilus pertussis of Bordet-Gengou occurs 
in abundance in the droplet spray expelled in the early stages 
of the attack, but is less easily recovered as the disease 
progresses. 

Incubation Period. — Seven to fourteen days to the catarrhal 
stage. The paroxysmal stage commences from seven to 
fourteen days later. 

Clinical Description. — Tj^ically, the disease presents two 
stages : (i) a febrile catarrhal stage characterised mainly by 
pharyngitis and tracheitis due to the multiplication of the 
specific and associated organisms. After a week or ten days 
this stage merges into (ii) an afebrile stage of paroxysmal cough 
product by the sensitisation of respiratory mucosa by a 
specific endoneurotoxin absorbed during the catarrhal stage. 
The catarrhal stage resembles a persistent common cold upou 
which is superimposed a harsh cough. The couglis are at 
first single, but soon become grouped ” and at length 
paroxysmal. The first paroxysm terminated by a “ whoop ” 
is usually heard at night. Vomiting after coughing is very 
suggestive of whooping-cough before the whoop appears. 

During an uncomplicated attack the paucity of pulmonarv' 
physical signs is throughout strikingly disproportionate to the 
severity of the cough. In infants and the aged the illness 
may be confined to the catarrhal stage, or no typical whoop 
may occur. In infants paroxysmal sneezing may precede, 
follow, or replace entirely the paroxysmal cough. 

The paroxysm may be divided into three stages : (i) a short 



38 mFECnOUS DISEASES 

inspiration (not constant) ; (ii) a series of short sharp coughs 
which appear to gather speed and violence ; and, finally, 
(iii) a long-drawn inspiration ; the sudden entry of air into the 
emptied lungs through a partially closed glottis gives rise to 
the characteristic whoop. The paroxysm is frequently succeeded 
by the vomiting of mucus and food particles. The number of 
paroxysms, which are always more frequent at night, may vary 
from as many as fifty to as few as two or three in the twenty-four 
hours ; their frequency and completeness are indications of 
the severity and progress of the case. Although many weeks 
may elapse before they cease entirely, the paroxysms gradually 
become incomplete, atypical and occasional. Some children 
retain the “ habit ” of whooping long after they have ceased 
to be either ill or infectious. 

A paroxysm may come on quite suddenly. Emotional 
excitement, change of posture, and particularly the swallowing 
of food, may suffice to bring on an attack. During the 
paroxysm which, once started, nothing avails to stop, there is 
intense venous congestion of the face, which assumes an almost 
bloated appearance, with conjunctival suffusion and sometimes 
epistaxis. When the paroxysm ends, the child rapidly recovers 
its ordinary appearance and its equanimity. 

During the expiratory coughs the tongue is projected 
violently and repeatedly over the lower central incisor teeth. 
In this way the fraenulum linguae at length becomes abraded, 
and in some cases an ulcer is produced. 

Besides epistaxis, subconjunctival hceynorrhages are frequent. 
Less common is bleeding from the membrana tympani. Haemo- 
ptysis and haematemesis have been recorded. 

Complications. — The complications of whooping-cough are 
more serious and dangerous than the disease itself. They are 
as foUows : — 

Respiratory. — Broncho-pneumonia is common, and fre- 
quently fatal in young children ; lobar pneumonia is much 
less common. Empyema occasionally follows either. Emphy- 
sema of any type may occur. 

A^eram^.-^onvulsions may occur in infants and young 
children. The attack usually succeeds a paroxysm. Cerebral 
haemorrhage may prove rapidly fatal. 

Otitis Media, as the result of secondary infection of the 
nasopharynx, may occur, as in measles and scarlet fever. 

Hernin and Prolapse. — In the infant the violence of the 
paro^sms may give rise to hernia. Increase in the size of an 
existing umbilical hernia is common. Prolapse of the rectum 
may occur and be difficult to control. 



WHOOPING-COUGH 39 

By far the oonunonest and most important complications 
are broncho-pneumonia and convulsions. 

Whooping-cough and measles not uncommonly occur 
together. Diphtheria, as a secondary infection supervening 
at any stage, naturally increases the gravity of the prog- 
nosis. 

SeqnelsB. — Some degree of emphysema may persist. More 
important is the occurrence of fibrosis and bronchiectasis after 
broncho-pneumonia or the possibility of activation of a latent 
focus of tuberculosis. 

Diagnosis. — Clinical diagnosis in the catarrhal stage may be 
impossible. A continued harsh cough which increases in 
frequency and severity from day to day, without adequate 
physical signs to account for it, is suggestive, particularly if 
followed by vomiting. The foUowing accessory procedures 
may afford assistance : (i) Cough-plates — Petri-dishes con- 

taining a defibrinated, preferably human, blood medimn, are 
exposed 4 or 5 inshes from the child’s mouth in order to 
collect spray (not sputum) during the act of coughing. After 
incubation for three days, the pearl-like colonies of U. pertussis 
may be discerned. (ii) Blood-count — During the early 
paroxysmal stage there is a high lymphocytosis, (iii) The 
blood sedimentation-rate is retard^ ; in other infections the 
rate is accelerated. 

Gold and Bell suggest that a diagnostic triad of 
suspicious cough, lymphocytosis, and a retarded sedimenta- 
tion-rate is peculiar to whooping-cough. Specific complement- 
fixation and agglutination may be demonstrated in a high 
proportion of cases, but only late in the disease. Skin tests 
for specific allergy are quite unreliable. 

!^fore the cough becomes definitely paroxysmal it may be 
confused with ordinary bronchitis. When the whoop is definitely 
established there can hardly be room for doubt. 

Treatment. — The taking of food or drink may start a 
paroxysm followed by vomiting, and thus the child may become 
undernourished. Food must ^ given slowly in small quantities 
at a time. If vomiting is troublesome it may be necessary to 
feed the patient immediately after a paroxj’-sm, as food is then 
usually retained. 

The treatment of whooping-cough is unsatisfactory. If 
injected in the earliest stages of catarrh, vaccines or endotoxins 
may mitigate the duration and severity of the attack ; injected 
only in ^e paroxysmal stage, these preparations are useless. 
Some have claimed a measure of success for convalescent serum 
only, however, if given very early. 



40 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

Drugs.— Linctus scill® co. (B.P.C.) in J to 1 drachm doses 
is useful in the catarrhal st^e. For the control of the 
paroxysms^ Tinct, belladonnce increased daily to the limit of 
tolerance is sometimes of value in mild cases ; for those more 
severe, ephedrine (iV gr* for an infant to | gr. for a child of five) 
may be combined with belladonna ; for very severe paroxysms, 
phenobarbitone sodium gr. (infants), ^ gr. (under five), and 
J gr. (over five)) is frequently effective. The drug must be 
withdrawn as soon as possible. Sulphormmides are valuable 
in broncho-pneumonia. 

Mode ol Spread. — Whooping-cough is spread by infective 
droplets or spray, especially during the catarrhal stage. 
Recently-soiled articles of personal use axe also capable of 
transmitting infection. Whooping-cough must be considered 
as infective until one month after the commencement of the whoop ; 
the causal organism is then not recoverable on blood-plates. 

Prevention. — Prophylaxis is of the utmost importance. 
Segregation, to be effective, must be early and include those 
who are merely suspect. Vaccines prepared from H. pertussis 
in the correct antigenic phase are stated to possess prophylactic 
value, but, so far, dosage is not agreed and results vary 
widely. The concurrent disinfection or destruction of articles 
of any sort used or soiled by the patient is of infinitely 
greater importance than the terminal disinfection of room or 
bedding. 


MUMPS 

(Epidemic Parotitis) 

iSiiology. — ^Mumps is endemic in all large centres of popula- 
tion, and is most prevalent during the winter and early spring. 
Children of school age and adolescents are most susceptible 
to the disease, and institutional outbreaks are common. The 
causal agent is a filterable virus with neurotropic affinities 
and is present in the saliva and nasal discharges during the 
early days of the attack. 

Incubation Period. — Seventeen or eighteen days are common 
periods, occasionally twenty-one days. 

Clinical Description. — ^There may be no prodromal symptoms. 
In young adults and some children, general malaise, shivering, 
rise of temperature to about lor P., epistaxis, and complaint 
of stiflfness of the muscles of the neck may initiate the prodromal 
stage. Sore throat is not uncommon. The prodromal stage 
may continue for three days, or exceptionally longer, before 



MUMPS 


41 


localising signs are apparent. Swelling of the parotid is first 
detected in that portion which lies between the posterior margin 
of the ramus of the mandible and the mastoid process. At 
first quite slight, and only appreciable to palpation, it rapidly 
increases. The resulting tension of the overlying tissues results 
in a characteristic uplifting of the lobe of the ear. Confirmation 
of the diagnosis of mumps may be afforded at an early stage 
by the appearance of papillitis at the orifice of Stensen’s duct 
(parotid duct), by tenderness on pressure upwards and back- 
wards behind the angle of the jaw, and by the occurrence of a 
lymphocytosis. 

By the third or fourth day from the commencement of the 
process the whole of the gland, including the portion overlying 
the masseter, lias reached the maximum degree of enlargement. 
Adjacent tissues become oedematous ; the skin is stretched 
and may be slightly reddened. The disease may remain 
unilateral, but usually both glands are affected, successively 
or simultaneously. When the swelling is at its greatest, the 
patient experiences difficulty and pain upon attempting to 
open his mouth. Saliva, which at first dribbled from the 
comers of the mouth, becomes scanty, the mouth dry, and 
the tongue furred. The temperature may remain high for 
a week. The submaxillary and sublingual glands may be 
involved. During epidemics, cases have been detected where 
the process has been confined to one or other of these glands, 
the parotids escaping. Associated enlargement of neighbouring 
lymphatic glands is usually present. Albuminuria is frequent ; 
deafness is a common complaint during the height of the 
swelling. The enlargement gradually subsides, and in about 
a week or ten days the parotids have returned to their normal 
size. Suppuration never occurs unless secondary infection has 
taken place. 

“ Cerebral Mumps '' — In some epidemics a number of cases 
have at the onset shown meningeal symptoms. In the menin- 
geal reaction of mumps clinical signs of meningitis are not 
tionclusive or complete. The cerebrospinal fluid is imder 
pressure, but quite clear ; there is an excess of l}rmpho- 
cytes ; the fluid is sterile on cultiue ; Fehling’s solution is 
r^uced. Meningo-encephalitis may occur at any stage. The 
optic, facial, and auditory nerves may be involved. Occasion- 
ally optic atrophy and permanent nerve-deafness result. 

Orchitis . — Mumps is peculiar in that metastatic involve- 
ment of other glands, notably the testes, may occur. In 
some epidemics orchitis is much commoner than in others. 
It usually occurs about a week or ten dajTs after the initial 



42 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

parotid swelling, and as a rule one testicle only is affected. 
Exceptionally orchitis occurs simultaneously with the parotitis, 
and rarely it may be the first or even the only manifestation 
of the disease. Orchitis is rare before puberty, but common 
in adolescents and young men. Testicular pain and tenderness 
are very severe and constitutional disturbance considerable. 
Both the body and the epididymis may be affected, and 
atrophy may result. In girls, mastitis and rarely oOphoritis 
may occur. Acute pancreatitis occurring a few days after the 
initial parotid swelling, or much later in convalescence, is an 
imcommon but well-recognised complication. 

Diagnosis. — In the presence of an epidemic of mumps, the 
diagnosis can hardly be in doubt. The appearance of a fully 
developed case is unmistakable. Parotitis occasionally occurs 
in the course of other infections, especially typhoid, and is 
usually suppurative. In Mikulicz’s disease (vide p. 391) there 
is chronic symmetrical enlargement of aU the salivary and 
lachrymal glands. Salivary calculus and tumours of the parotid 
may be easily excluded. An inexcusable error, which may be 
attended by disastrous results, is to confuse the “ bull-neck ” 
of malignant diphtheria (vide p. 21) with mumps. One glance 
at the throat would serve to prevent such a disaster. The 
converse mistake is also made. 

Treatment. — Bed in a well-aired room, a dose of calomel 
followed by a saline aperient, and a light diet in a form which 
can easily be swallowed are commonly all that are necessary. 
The hygiene of the mouth is important. For orchitis, a 
suspensory bandage and applications of some soothing pre- 
paration such as glycerine of belladonna may be used. 

Mode of Spread and Prevention. — Mumps is conveyed by 
droplet infection ; the disease is not highly infective. The 
patient must be isolated until swelling of the affected glands 
has subsided for a week. In practice this means an average 
period of isolation of two weeks from onset. Non-immune 
contacts should be kept under observation (not in quarantine) 
for at least three weeks from the date of the last known 
exposure. Concurrent disinfection of soiled handkerchiefs and 
utensils is important. 


SMALLPOX 
( Variola) 

Smallpox occurs under all climatic conditions. The disease 
is endemic in parte of Northern Africa and in India. The 



43 


SMALLPOX 

West Indies and South Africa are among the endemic foci of 
a milder type of the disease. Smallpox occurs in epidemic 
and, in the past, has occurred in pandemic form. The last 
pandemic, in 1871-72, caused 40,000 deaths in the British 
Isles. In 1901-4 an epidemic resulted in some 4,000 deaths 
in England and Wales. Since that time the mortality from 
the disease has steadily fallen in this country owing to a 
change in the clinical t}^. The disease shows seasonal 
prev^ence. In countries of temperate climate it is a “ cold 
weather ” disease ; fewest cases occur in the summer. L. 
Rogers holds that the prevalence of smallpox in endemic centres 
is dependent upon the absolute humidity of the atmosphere. 
Low absolute humidity favours, while high checks the pre- 
valence of the disease. 

The causal agent is a filterable virus and occurs as the 
elementary bodies of Paschen in the vesicle fluid. Guamieri’s 
inclusion ladies are aggregations of these. The virus is identical 
with that of vaccinia (ride p. 49). Strains of the same virus of 
differing virulence give rise to clinical types of smallpox varying 
in severity. “ The viruses of vaccinia, alastrim {vide infra), 
and of a severe case of confluent smallpox aU alike act specificaUy 
to anti-vaccina serum, both in the complement fixation and in 
the agglutination test ” (Mervyn Gordon). There are two 
chief strains of the virus : (a) Eastern, causing smallpox 
of the “ classical ” type {variola major ) ; (6) Western, derived 
from the United States or from the West Indies, causing cases 
of a mild or relatively mild type {variola minor or “ alastrim ”). 
This form occurred in England and Wales in 1922. After 
several years of prevalence variola minor has temporarily died 
out in the British Isles. 

Before vaccination was available, smallpox was a disease of 
children ; 90 per cent, of the deaths occurring in those under 
five years of age. In 1926, out of a total of more than 10,000 
cases, only 8 vaccinated persons contracted the disease under 
fifteen years of age, whereas 4,840 unvaccinated persons con- 
tracted the disease under that age. In the same year the case 
mortality of this mild type was only 0-15 per cent. In the 
1901-4 outbreak of variola major the mortality ranged from 6 
to 30 per cent, for all oases. 

Pathology. — Apart from the cutaneous lesions, nothing char- 
acteristic is to be seen at autopsy. Myocardial degeneration 
is marked as it is in death from other toxic processes. The 
spleen is enlarged and soft. Signs of fatty degeneration may 
be present in the liver and kidneys. The lungs frequently 
show evidence of broncho-pneumonia. 



44 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


Incubation Period. — This is very constant in variola major : 
twelve days to the onset of the prodromal stage, fourteen days 
to the first appearance of the eruption. 

Clinical Description. — (a) Variola major. The prodromal 
stage of smallpox lasts for two or sometimes three days. The 
onset is usually, but not always, abrupt. Headache, vomiting, 
severe pain in the back and limbs, shivering, and marked 
pyrexia are common at the onset. Relaxation of muscular tone 
occurs, particularly well seen in a characteristic fatigued 
expression of the face. Delirium may occur. The temperature 
steadily rises and may attain to 104° or 105° F. by the end of 
the second or third day. Prodromal rashes sometimes appear 
and may be petechial, erythematous, or urticarial. The 
petechial type, always indicative of a severe attack, invariably 
appears in the flexures of the groins, extending upwards as 
far as the umbilicus, and downwards to some two inches below 
Poupart’s ligament. The rash is most dense over this area, 
although it may extend up the flanks towards the axillie. 
Being petechial, it persists for some days after the appearance 
of the eruption proper. The other prodromal rashes appear 
earlier than the petechial forms. Although characteristically 
patchy and fleeting, these rashes usually invade the “ bathing 
drawers ’’ area, and may persist until the eruption of papules, 
and then fade. 

Stage of Eruption. — 1. Papular Stage, — The eruption com- 
mences to appear as a rule upon the third day. It takes two, 
three, or sometimes four days to complete its evolution. The 
lesions are at first tiny macules, which soon become papules, 
set deep in the skin and surrounded by an areola. The focal 
lesions of smallpox appear in a definite manner, which it is of 
the highest importance to observe in order that a correct 
diagnosis may become reasonably certain. Not only do the 
lesions appear in a definite order, but they attain a definite 
distribution and relative density following certain well-defined 
laws which were worked out by Ricketts. 

In point of time of appearance the lesions appear in the 
skin in the following order : forehead, face and scalp ; wrists 
and the backs of the hands ; trunk, chest, back, and abdomen ; 
legs and feet. They may also appear in the buccal cavity, 
especially on the soft palate, on the tracheo-bronchial mucous 
membranes, including the larynx, and occasionally upon the 
conjunctiva. 

In jK)int of density the following distribution is observed. 
In the first place, the lesions of smallpox tend to occur profusely 
upon any sites which have been irritated during the period of 



SMALLPOX 


45 


incubation or which have been subjected to pressure ; they 
appear most profusely upon exposed parts and upon convexities. 
In the fully erupted papular stage the lesions are distributed 
centrifugally in the following order of decreasing density : 
(i) the face ; (ii) the wrists and backs of the hands ; (iii) the 
forearms ; (iv) the back ; (v) the feet and the extensor aspects 
generally. The lesions occur much more sparsely upon areas 
of the skin which are normally protected, such as the chest 
and abdomen, the inner aspects of the thigh, the groins and the 
axillsB. So regularly is the axilla free or relatively free from 
the eruption in smallpox that Ricketts termed the phenomenon 
“ the sign of the axilla.” 

When the eruption of papules is complete, the temperature 
usually falls and the patient expresses himself as feeling much 
better. The rise of temperature in the prodromal stage is 
due to toxaemia which does not always entirely disappear with 
the completion of the papular stage, but commonly does so. 

2. Vesicvlar Stage , — Gradually the papules become con- 
verted into vesicles ; associated with this change is an increase 
in the area and brightness of the areola which surrounds each 
lesion. The vesiculation of the papules is completed in two 
days as a rule. The apex of some of the vesicles may show 
“ umbilication.” If the waU of a vesicle be punctured with a 
needle it does not collapse, owing to the multilocular character 
of the vesicle. For some twenty -four hours the contents of the 
vesicles remain clear ; they then become opalescent ; this is 
the beginning of the pustular stage. 

3. Pustular Stage , — With the commencement of pustulation, 
the temperature, which has remained low since the completion 
of the eruption of papules, again begins to rise, and continues 
to do so until the stage of pustulation is complete. This 
secondary rise is due to septic absorption. The stage of 
pustulation takes four or five days to complete. The lesions 
swell up and assume a tense hemispherical appearance ; the 
areola fades and disappears. Upon the face, where the rash 
is most profuse, this swelling and associated oedema of the 
tissues results in what may amount to obliteration of the 
ordinary features, and the patient becomes unrecognisable. 
The constitutional symptoms return with great severity. 

4. Stage of Desiccation , — ^The pustules gradually shrink and 
dry up, forming crusts or scabs which ultimately separate, 
leaving characteristic deep-set pocks. This stage is of variable 
duration. The separation of the scabs, and particularly of the 
“ seeds ” upon the palms and soles, may take three, four, or 
more weeks. 



46 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


(6) Variola minor (alastrim) varies widely in olinioal 
severity. Cases have occurred indistinguishable in any respect 
from a severe attack of classical smallpox. On the other hand, 
“ influenza with spots ” has not inaptly described most oases. 
Even in the xmvaocinated, the prodromal iUness may be trifling 
and the lesions very sparse. Mortality in either vaccinated 
or unvaccinated patients is very low. There is a tendency to 



Fio. 3 

Temperature chart of smallpox in an unvaccinated patient aged 48. 


prolongation of the incubation period which may extend to 
fifteen days to the onset of pro^omal symptoms. The latter 
although usually sUght may be severe, and in any case form no 
guide to the probable profusion of the eruption. Prodromal 
rashes are rare and, when they occur, erythematous. The 
distribution of the eruption is identical with that of ordinary 
smallpox. The more leisurely eruption of the papules, which 
may appear upon the face twenty -four hours earlier than upon 
the extremities, the more rapid maturation of the lesions, which 
may be unilocular, and the marked tendency to abort at any 
stage give a deceptive appearance of “ cropping ” which has 
led to confusion with chickenpox. Secondary fever is slight or 
absent and the incidence of complications is low. In tho 
unvaccinated, smaUjwx occurs in unmodified form, but tho 
attack becomes modijied as the result of previous successful 
vaccination. 

Modified smallpox {Varioloid) is clinicafly indistinguishablo 
from varioia minor. In the former, modification results from 








SMALLPOX 


47 


partial immunity to a virulent strain ; in the other it is due to 
a degraded virus (Marsden). 

A further classification into discrete and confluent smallpox 
refers to the closeness with which the lesions are set upon the 
face. 

Hcemorrhagic smallpox is characterised by the extreme 
severity of the prodromal toxaemia, the occurrence of petechial 
prodromal rashes, and of generalised erythematous rashes. 
Rarely death may occur from toxaemia either before the 
appearance of the papules or as they are appearing. The 
papules are poorly formed and velvety to the touch. 
Haemorrhages from mucous membranes occur. 

Complications. — ^The important complications are the ' 
following : — 

(а) Cardiac. — ^Myocardial failure may occur at any stage, 
but most commonly during the phase of pustulation. 

(б) Respiratory . — ^Lesions occurring in the la^rynx may 
occasion oedema of the glottis. Some bronchitis is usual, and 
broncho-pneumonia is common. 

(c) Nervous. — Transient toxic encephalitis may compli- 
cate the prodromal stage. Encephalo-myelitis, pathologically 
identical with post-vaccinal encephahtis (in/m), may occur 
from five to thirteen days aftor the appearance of the focal 
rash. Peripheral neuritis and psychoses, e.g., melanchoha, are 
occasional sequelae. 

(d) Special Senses. — Some degree of conjimctivitis occurs in 
most severe cases. Keratitis, followed by ulceration and rapid 
destruction of the globe, with sympathetic ophthalmia of 
the other eye, may result in complete blindness. Otitis media 
is not uncommon. 

Albuminuria is constant, and suppression of urine may 
result in uraemia. Orchitis is an occasional comphcation 
in severe cases and produces areas of necrosis in the body of 
the testicle. Boils are common and may be very troublesome. 

Diagnosis. — 1. Prodromal Stage. — Influenza is the condition 
most commonly confused. Other conditions causing malaise, 
vomiting, pyrexia, and more or less localised pain, are pneu- 
monia and acute appendicitis. The following diseases have 
been diagnosed as the prodromal stage of smallpox ; cerebro- 
spinal fever, heat-stroke, typhus, relapsing fever, plague, and 
malaria. 

2. Eruptive Stage. — The characteristic centrifugal distribu- 
tion may be confirmed by an actual count of the lesions present 
upon the proximal and distal portions of a limb or of those above 
a line drawn at the level of the nostrils, compared with those 



48 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

below such an imaginary line. The characters of the individual 
lesions, although important, are subordinate to the crucial 
diagnostic test of distribution. The papule is deep-seated, and 
if picked up between finger and thumb it feels “ shotty.’^ 
The vesicle is multilocular and frequently shows umbilication. 
Unilocular vesicles may occur in children and in V. minor. 
Recent successful vaccination renders a diagnosis of smallpox 
very unlikely. Vaccination first performed in the eruptive 
stage will be unsuccessful. 

The condition most liable to be confused with smallpox is, 
of course, chickenpox. In the latter disease the prodromal 
period is absent or of negligible severity. The rash of chicken- 
pox also differs from that of smallpox in distribution and type 
{vide p 52). One important point in the differentiation of the 
two conditions is that in chickenpox the maturation of the 
lesions is rapid and adjacent lesions may be in markedly 
different stages of development ; thus papules, vesicles, and 
pustules may be seen side by side on the same area of skin. 
This is never the case in smallpox, where aU the lesions in any 
particular area of skin maturate concurrently. (See, however, 
Variola minor, p. 4().) 

There may also be confusion between the eruption of small- 
pox in its early stages and that of measles. The deeply seated 
smallpox papules are unlike the superficial lesions of measles, in 
which, too, Koplik’s spots are pathognomonic. 

Certain eruptions may be confused with smallpox ; such 
are acne, bullous impetigo, pustular syphilides, erythema 
multiforme, dermatitis herpetiformis, and drug rashes due to 
bromides, iodides, copaiba, and to the preparations sold as 
“ backache and kidney pills,” which often contain copaiba 
or similar oleo-resins. The history of backache followed by 
a rash may be confusing unless the history of pill-taking is 
also elicited. 

Flocculation Teat , — This test introduced by Burgess, Oaigie, 
and Tulloch is mainly of retrospective diagnostic value. To 
saline extracts of the crusts from a suspected case are added 
various dilutions of a rabbit “ vaccinia flocculating serum.” 
The occurrence of flocculation after incubation is confirmatory. 

Treatment. — Vaccination during the latter part of the 
incubation period and in the prodromal stage may modify the 
attack, but in the eruptive stage it has no effect. Delirium 
may call for appropriate sedative treatment and sometimes for 
restraint, as the patient may attempt to escape., The heart 
must be watched throughout the attack and cardiac stimulants 
employed if indicated. Broncho-pneumonia needs treatment 



VACCINIA AND VACCINATION 49 

upon ordinary lines. In the case of keratitis with perforating 
ulcer, prompt excision of the globe may become necessary in 
order to prevent sympathetic ophthalmia. Sulphonamides 
have been used with success to mitigate the severity of the 
pustular stage. 

Mode of Spread, and Prevention. — ^The virus is conveyed in 
the secretions of the mouth and nose, and also persists in moist 
scabs. The disease may be spread through the air for short 
distances. The administrative control of the disease is based 
upon the view that aerial convection may occur. Although 
both are disseminated with equal readiness, the strain causal of 
V. major, being highly virulent, is effective in smaller doses 
than the degraded strain causal of F. minor, with the practical 
result that F. minor is less infectious. Patients must be 
isolated in a hospital set apart for that disease from the time 
of diagnosis imtil the scabs have completely separated, to 
leave healed cicatrices. AU known contacts must be vaccinated 
or, if they refuse, be kept under observation (not necessarily 
in quarantine) for sixteen daj'^s. Vaccination and re-vaccination 
is the real method of prevention. 


VACCINIA AND VACCINATION 

In 1796 Edward Jenner, of Gloucester, introduced the process 
of vaccination. He noted that inoculation of human beings with 
the virus of cowpox, “ vaccination,” produced a localised 
process which was protective against smallpox. AU subsequent 
evidence is in favour of Jenner’s belief. The virus of vaccinia 
“ is nothing else than that of variola modified in its virulence 
for man, but not in its immunising action against variola, by 
passage through the cow ” (Mervyn Gordon). 

The gradual extension of vaccination during the nineteenth 
century resulted not only in a dechne in the mortality from 
smaUpox at aU ages but in a virtual reversal of the age incidence. 
Instead of being predominantly a disease of childhood its 
maximum incidence and mortality feU upon unvaccinated or 
imperfectly vaccinated adults. Due in part to the facilities 
provided for “ conscientious objection ” and in psurti to the 
prev^ence of a mild type of the disease during recent years, 
vaccination with its occasional sequel of encephalitis has 
declined in Great Britain. The introduction and spread of 
claMioal smallpox (F. major) amongst a largely unvaccinated 
or imperfectly vaccinated population is thus Uable to have 
deplorable results. 



60 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

Prior to the Vaooination Order of 1929, with a view to 
seooring immunity to smallpox of maximum duration, it was 
advised that four insertions of calf lymph should be made in 
ordm: to secure a total area of vesiculation of not less than half 
a square inch. While four insertions are still permissible and 
desirable if effective immunity for “ not less than seven years ” 
be desired. Public Vaccinators are now directed to make a 
single linear insertion with a minimum of trauma in order to 
reduce as far as possible local and constitutional effects amd 
the likelihood of nervous sequelae. Scarification and cross- 
hatching aire to be deprecated. 

Technique. — (a) Glycerinated calf lymph contained in 
capillary tubes is used. It must be stored in an ice chest 
until required and used within a week of receipt. Excellent 
results have been obtained from the use of a bacteria-fr«e 
vaccine produced by growing the virus upon chick-embiyo 
membranes, thus obviating the use of non-sterile lymph. 
(6) Site. — ^The left deltoid region or the inner side of the arm 
just above the internal condyle (Goldberger’s method), (c) Pre- 
paration. — ^The skin is washed with soap and water and allowed 
to dry. No non-volatile antiseptic must be used, (d) Insertion. 
— The ends of the capillary tube are broken and an ejector 
attached. One drop of lymph (for each insertion) is blown out 
on to the skin. With a round-bodied, sharp-pointed sewing 
needle, sterilised and cooled, a superficial scratch is made 
without drawing blood through the drop of lymph. The 
length of the scratch should be J of an inch but must not 
exceed J of an inch, (e) Dressing. — The insertion is allowed 
to dry thorovyhly. An elastoplast dressing is then appbed. 

( / ) Inspection. — The arm should be inspected on the seventh 
or eighth day and again on the fourteenth or fifteenth day. 
Other methods of insertion by multiple punctures or intra- 
dermally are preferred by some ; the above is the usual 
“ standard ” technique. 

The course of a successful primary vaccination is as follows : 
(1) there is an incubation period of three days, during which 
itching and irritation are common ; (2) on the fourth day a 
papule appears at each insertion ; (3) on the fifth day the 
papule becomes a vesicle surroimded by an areola, and the 
vesicle during the ensuing twenty-four hours shows umbili- 
cation ; (4) during the seventh and eighth days the vesicle 
becomes opalescent, the areola increases in intensity, and there 
is much infiltration of the whole site ; (6) firom the eighth to 
the tenth day definite pustulation of each lesion occurs, witii 
an associated enlargement of the axillary glands. The arm 



VACCINIA AND VACCINATION 


51 


may become quite “ brawny,” as in oelluUtis. Constitutional 
symptoms, of varying severity, are met with. Transient 
splenomegaly occurs in a proportion of cases. From the tenth 
day onwards the pustules gradually dry up to form scabs, which 
ultimately separate, leaving scars at first pink, but later white 
and exhibiting pitting or foveation. This foveated scar is the 
essential sign of a sucoessf^ vaccination. 

Revaccination, — ^Unless a very long period has elapsed since 
the primary operation, the local and general signs and symptoms 
which follow a revaccination are usually considerably modified. 
The lesions may abort at any stage. Revaccination should be 
carried out every seven years, or even more frequently in the 
cose of persons living in countries where smallpox is endemic. 

Oeneralised Vaccinia very occasionally occurs. It is char- 
acterised by the eruption of papules upon the body at any time 
during the phase of activity of the local lesions, i.e., from the 
fourth to the tenth day. The papules appear in crops and go 
through the stages of vesiculation and pustulation. 

The appearance of lesions elsewhere than upon the arm 
may be due to the accidental transference of lymph by the 
patient, after scratching the arm, into an abrasion upon the 
face or elsewhere. 

Complications. — These are usually due to sepsis introduced 
by the patient as the result of scratching. Erysipelas may 
occur in this way. Infection wth syphilis or tubercle is an 
absolute impossibility as the result of vaccination with calf 
lymph, but it was possible in the old days of arm to arm 
vaccination, which is now never employed. 

Post-vaccinal EncepJialitis. — The rare occurrence of en- 
cephalitis or meningo-encephalitis following vaccination has 
been recorded in recent years. The symptoms and liistological 
lesions appear to be identical with those of encephalitis 
associated with other of the acute viral infections, e.g., measles. 
Practically all the recorded cases have occurred following 
primary vaccination in children of school age. Cure has followed 
the injection of serum derived from a person recently vaccinated 
with lymph from the same batch. Simultaneous injection of 
parental whole blood has been practised. 

Duration of Immunity. — ^The duration of immunity is 
directly proportional to the area of true foveated scarring. 
When the area of scarring measures not less than half a square 
inch, immunity may be relied upon for seven years and probably 
for ten. No information is yet available as to the duration 
of immunity procured by the single-insertion method. The 
intervals at which revaccination is advised have been stated 



52 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

above. Even if immunity, following primary vaccination, has 
waned, the severity of an attack of smallpox is likely to be 
inversely proportional to the area of foveated scarring. 

Vaccination performed subsequently to infection with 
smallpox and up to the date of onset of symptoms will “ take ** 
and pass through its typical course. Protection is afforded by 
vaccination performed within three days of infection, but this 
may not be absolute in those vaccinated for the first time ; 
the course of the disease, however, will be exceedingly mild. 
Vaccination may mitigate the severity of the disease when 
performed at any time after infection up to the date of onset. 


CHICKENPOX 
( Varicella) 

iEtiology. — Chickenpox occurs all over the world, chiefly in 
localised epidemics in schools and children’s institutions. The 
disease is most prevalent in the winter months. Chickenpox 
and smallpox may be prevalent together. The virus is a filter- 
passer distinct from that of smallpox or vaccinia. Amies has 
described elementary bodies similar to the Paschen bodies in 
smallpox. Though chiefly a disease of childhood, chickenpox 
attacks adults, and second attacks, though rare, are occasionally 
seen. 

Incubation Period. — From fourteen to twenty -one days. 

Clinical Description. — In children, the prodromal period may 
be absent or confined to slight pyrexia and increase in pulse- 
rate ; adults, however, may exhibit prodromal symptoms such 
as malaise, nausea, and pain in the back for a period of twenty- 
four hours or, rarely, longer, before the eruption appears. 
There is occasionally a prodromal rash of scarlatmiform typo. 
The lesions appear in from three to five crops over a period of 
two to four days. Initially macules or macido-papules, they 
become, within a few hours, clear, well-filled superficial vesicles, 
many of a typically elliptical shape. In tw'enty-four hours 
the vesicles assume a pale yellowish opalescent appearance and 
become flaccid pustules. Ultimately, scabbing and separation 
take place. Shallow, pinkish depressions which form white 
cicatrices are left. Owing to the fact that the lesions appear in 
crops and that the cycle of the individual lesions from papule to 
scab is a short one, lesions in various stages of development 
are present upon the skin after the first twenty-four to thirty- 
six hours. The eruption probably always first appears within 



CHICKENPOX 


53 


the buccal cavity, but the lesions here are so dehcate that they 
readily rupture and may not be recognisable. They may 
occur within the larynx and upon the conjunctiva. Upon the 
skin they first appear upon the back, chest, and abdomen — 
particularly the lower abdomen — and the adductor aspects of 
the thighs. The face and hairy scalp are next invaded. The 
arms and legs, including sometimes the palms and soles, are 
usually the last to present lesions. 

The distribution as a whole is centripetal, being most 
abundant upon the trunk. The numbers of lesions upon the 
upper arms exceed those upon the forearms ; the numbers upon 
the thighs those upon the legs. The lesions of chickenpox, 
in contrast to smallpox, tend to invade concavities and protected 
surfaces such as the axilla. 

Herpes and Varicella. — ^The virus of chickenpox, ordinarily 
dermatotropic, occasionally assumes neurotropic properties 
resulting in the clinical manifestations of herpes zoster. This 
is not to say that herpes zoster is invariably due to the virus 
of chickenpox. 

The exceptional occurrence of encephalitis provides further 
evidence of the neurotropic affinities of the virus. 

Complications. — The occasional occurrence of vesicles within 
the larjTix has been noted. Very rarely this localisation has 
necessitated tracheotomy. Lesions upon the conjunctiva, 
being quite superficial, rarely give rise to trouble. In debilitated 
children the lesions may ulcerate or become gangrenous. 
Varicella gangrenosa may bo caused by the infection of the 
lesions with haemolytic streptococci or virulent diphtheria 
bacilli, giving rise to early fulminating and late subacute forms 
respectively. Diphtheria and scarlet fever antitoxins and 
sulphonamides should be given as soon as possible in all cases 
of V , gangrenosa. 

Diagnosis. — If the points noted under chnical description 
are carefully compared with the description of smallpox, 
confusion between the diagnosis of the tw'o diseases should 
not arise. The prodromal soarlatiniform rash is sometimes 
diagnosed as scarlet fever. Papular urticaria, the lesions of 
which never appear in the mouth, scabies, and impetigo have 
also to be excluded. 

Treatment. — Bed and light diet for a few da5r8 are desirable. 
It is important to prevent undue scarring, either as the result 
of scratching the lesions or of secondary impetigo. Small doses 
of the sulphonamides, given early in the attack, may reduce the 
severity of pustulation. Separation of the scabs is facilitated 
by treating each with carbolised oil applied gently with a feather. 



54 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


Mode o! Spread and Prevention. — The disease is most 
infective in its earliest stages. Infeotivity wanes rapidly after 
the full appearance of the eruption, but isolation should be 
maintained until all the scabs have separated. Infection is 
commonly conveyed from person to person ; in the early stages 
the virus is readily carried upon the hands of a third person 
who has been in attendance. There is some evidence that in 
its early and most infective phase cliickenpox may be spread 
for short distances, as from bed to bed, through the air. Pre- 
vention consists ill the earliest possible isolation of cases, 
concurrent and terminal disinfection, and an observation period 
of 21 days for exposed non-immune children. 


TYPHOID AND PARATYPHOID FEVERS 
{Enteric Fever) 

etiology. — Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers (A, B, and C), 
the diseases which comprise the enteric group,’* occur all 
over the world and affect aU races. Of the paratyphoids, 
B is more common in England ; in the East, A is more 
frequently encountered ; C is of exceptional occurrence. The 
prevalence or otherwise of enteric fever in any country, district, 
or town is an index of the general standard of sanitation, 
particularly in relation to the water supply. In this country 
the number of notifications of enteric fever varies considerably 
in individual years, c.g., 1,200 in 1934 and 2,500 in 1936. 
These figures are small compared with those obtaining in the 
past; even as recently as 1911 there were some 13,800 
notifications. ‘‘ There is a tendency in recent years to a low 
level of diffusion over the whole country, suggesting that the 
major causes such as polluted water supplies and urban en- 
vironment are gradually being eliminated and there now remain 
the more elusive and less easily controlled factors such as 
carriers, contact infection, contaminated shell fish and other 
foods ” (G. Newman). 

Localised epidemics occur from time to time and an increase 
in the notifications in any year may be due, almost entirely, 
to a single outbreak. In the case of typhoid, especially, inquiries 
into an outbreak should first be directed to the water supply, 
next to milk, and then to shell-fish (oysters and mussels) and 
watercress. Epidemics of paratyphoid, more frequently perhaps 
than those of typhoid, have been traced to a carrier who in 



TYPHOID AND PARATYPHOID FEVERS 65 

institutional outbreaks may be discovered among the kitchen 
staff. Infection with baciUi of the enteric group may be 
indirect, through articles of food or drink, whether these have 
been infected through the medium of sewage, flies, or carriers, 
or direct, as happens when a nurse infects herself with the 
dejecta of a case of the disease. 

Carriers . — Persons who have had a recognised or unrecog- 
nised attack of the disease may continue to excrete organisms 
in the faeces, usually intermittently, for many years. The 
baoiUi persist in the gall-bladder and pass thence into the 
intestine. Biliary carriers are usually women, and, having 
regard to their closer association with the preparation of food, 
are the more dangerous. Urinary carriers also occur. This 
condition responds to the sulphonamides, whereas biliary 
carriers may require cholecystectomy if the sulphonamides 
prove unsuccessful after adequate trial. 

Enteric fever shows distinct seasonal incidence. In Great 
Britain prevalence commences in September and attains its 
maximum in October and November ; fewest cases occur in 
the spring. In warm climates the greatest number of cases 
occur during the hot weather. 

All ages are liable to attack by infections of the enteric 
group, but the period from ten to thirty-five provides the 
greatest number of coses. 

The fatality rate from typhoid varies from 10 to 20 per 
cent. ; for the paratyphoids it ranges from 1 to 9 per cent. 

Bacteriology. — The typhoid -paratyphoid bacilli belong to 
the Salmonella group and have the following characteristics : 
they are motile and, with suitable staining, can be shown to 
possess flagella. They are gram-negative, and in culture they 
do not ferment lactose. Differentiation between the various 
types depends on cultural and agglutination reactions. The 
bacilli occur in the blood in the early stages particularly, in 
the rose spots, the faeces, urine, and internal organs, especially 
the spleen and gall-bladder. 

Pathology. — Except that the intestinal lesions caiised by 
the paratyphoid bacilli are as a rule less severe than those due 
to Bad. typhi, and that in paratyphoid infections the large 
bowel shows ulceration more commonly than in typhoid, the 
pathology of the conditions is virtually the same. The typical 
lesions occur in Peyer’s patches, which imdergo progressive 
inflammatory changes resulting in ulceration and sloughing. 
The detachment of the slough may cause either hsemorrhage 
or perforation of the bowel, but the usual process is granulation 
and healing. The ulcers which occur are elliptical, with their 



56 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


long axes in line with the length of the intestine ; the edges 
are undermined and the bases dean ; there is associated 
enlargement of mesenteric glands. The spleen is enlarged and 
friable and teems with the specific organism. The liver shows 
degenerative changes. The heart-muscle is markedly flabby. 
Patches of Zenker’s degeneration may affect the large muscles. 
Suppurative arthritis and abscesses in the long bones occur, 
from either of which the specific organisms may be recovered. 
The so-called “ typhoid spine ” is a periostitis of the bodies 
of the vertebrae with associated changes in the inter- 
vertebral discs. 

Blood Picture, — Typically, leucopenia with eosinopenia 
occurs after the first few days, and may be an important 
accessory factor in diagnosis in the absence of bacteriological 
or serological facilities. Complications or secondary infec- 
tions during the course of the disease give rise, unless the 
patient’s condition be very grave, to a polymorphonuclear 
leucocytosis. 

Incubation Period. — In both typhoid and the paratyphoids 
the incubation period is variable ; that of typhoid varies from 
twelve to sixteen days, but exceptionally long periods exceeding 
twenty days are on record. The paratyphoids have even more 
variable incubation periods, ranging from five to fifteen days. 

Clinical Description. — Typhoid and the paratyphoids p>osse88 
marked clinical similarity, but show certain more or less 
characteristic differences. 

Typhoid. — The onset is usually insidious ; so insidious in 
some cases (ambulant forms) that the patient may walk about 
for days while actually suffering from the disease, until he is 
incapacitated by the gradual advance of the infection, or 
overtaken by some sudden calamity such as a haemorrhage or 
myocardial failure. In those who have undergone protective 
inoculation, but in whom immunity has to a great extent 
waned with the lapse of time, the disease may be mild or 
abortive. Such mild types also occur in children. 

Typhoid fever of average severity shows three fairly well 
marked stages : — 

First Stage . — This period is characterised by graduaUy 
advancing general malaise and a desire for sleep, although sleep 
is disturbed. 'Ihere is headache, which is usually frontal and 
often extremely severe, giddiness, pain in the limbs, and some- 
times in the right iliac fossa ; anorexia and thirst ; nausea 
and vomting, which, however, are relatively uncommon. The 
tongue is dry and furred, and the bowels are usually constipated 
at the onset. Epistaxis is not uncommon. 



TYPHOID AND PARATYPHOID FEVERS 67 

During the period of invasion, which lasts from five to seven 
days, the temperature rises by about a degree each evening, until 
by the end of the first week it has usually attained 103°-104° F. 
The temperature chart in enteric is often described as having 
a step-ladder character during the first week. 

Second Stage , — By the end of the first week the general 
symptoms have advanced and the patient presents a char- 
acteristic appearance. Markedly prostrated, he is inert and 
may be stuporose ; muttering delirium may be present, par- 
ticularly at night ; he has lost flesh ; the tongue is dry and 





mm 

irnavi 


■M 

ra 

ws 

■a 

■n 

■m 

mm 

am JU'IKfQflBCOEi1l£Xfl 

IBjJ 

IBH 

■ 


m 

■■ 

i|n 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 



1 

1 

1 

! 


1 

iWIJI 

1 

s 

% 


A 

5 





1 

rvi] 

1 

a 

1 

■ 

s 

1 

1 





m 

8 

m 

liS 

m 

m 

iilB 

Wk 

m 

learn 









Si 

s 

m 





Birl 


t'lQ. 4 


Temperature chart of typhoid fever. 


brown and there are sordes around the lips ; the abdomen is 
distended. The pulse is now soft, tends to be slow in proportion 
to the temperature, and is often dicrotic. 

At the end of the first week the eruption of “ typhoid 
spots occurs. These are discrete lenticular erj^thematous 
rose spots, which usually are seen upon the upper abdomen 
and upon the back. In number, they may confined to 
half a dozen and require careful search. The most important 
characteristic of the rose spot of typhoid is its transitory 
nature ; an individual spot is seldom visible for much over 
forty-eight hours, after which time it fades. Fresh crops of 
spots may continue to appear for as long as several weeks. 
If in a suspected case of enteric doubtful spots be seen, they 
should be ringed round with indelible pencil, so that at a later 
visit their presence or absence may be confirmed. By the end 
of the first week also the spleen has often become palpable. 
The typhoid patient may remain constipated throughout, but 
usually initial constipation is succeeded during the second week 
by diarrhoea. The stools in typhoid are typical — the so-called 
“ pea-soup ” stools. They are liquid and of a pale yellow colour, 




68 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


containing shreds of mucus, and are alkaline in reaction. 
Owing to the presence of the specific micro-organism in large 
numbers, the faeces, or articles of bedclothes contaminated by 
them, are highly infective. During the course of the second 
week the stools become more numerous, and sometimes twenty 
or more may be passed in the twenty -four hours. The urine 
is diminished in quantity during the height of the disease ; 
its specific gravity may be high, and the reaction is acid. 
Albuminuria occurs in a proportion of cases. The chlorides 
are diminished. Most characteristic is the high degree of 
indicanuria which occurs. Bacilluria is not uncommon. A 
certain degree of bronchitis may be regarded as normal in 
typhoid. In severe cases the patient gradually sinks into a 
“ typhoid state,” and may die from asthenia. The typhoid 
state is characterised by extreme prostration ; incontinence 
of urine and faeces is frequent, retention of urine less so. The 
patient is markedly stuporose during the day ; delirium, which 
is always more marked at night, is usually of the muttering 
type, but may be violent, necessitating 1‘estraint. Muscular 
tremors affecting the hands, tremor of the lips and the tongue, 
which maj^ be difficult to extrude owing to its parched state, 
also occur. The patient plucks at the bedclothes and gropes 
for non-existent objects. The facies is characteristic ; the 
features are pinched and drawn ; an irregular bright flush occurs 
upon the cheeks ; the eyes are sunken and the pupils dilated. 
Hiccough may be troublesome. The patient sinks into a state 
of coma-vigil, and death occurs from myocardial failure. 

In the case of average severity, after about two weeks of 
sustained pyrexia, the patient enters the third stage. 

Third Stage . — This is the period of decline of the disease, 
characterised by general physical and mental improvement. 
The temperature falls usually by lysis and rarely by crisis : 
the stools become less frequent and semi-formed or constipation 
may ensue. Urine is passed in normal quantity. The tongue 
cleans and appetite returns. Abdominal distension disappears 
and the spleen is no longer palpable. The patient is mentaUy 
clear and sleeps and eats well. 

This period of decline may be interrupted by recrudescence. 
All the symptoms return, and the patient is again in peril. 
Otherv^ise, the period of decline merges into that of convales- 
cence, which may be quite uneventful or may be terminated by 
a relapse after a varying apyrexial period. Relapses, more 
than one of which may occur, are usually, but not always, lees 
severe than the initial attack. All the symptoms and signs of 
the first attack, including the rose spots, are reproduced. 



TYPHOID AND PARATYPHOID FEVERS 69 

Second Attacks may occur at an interval of years after the first, 
but are rare. 

Pabatyphoid. — Apart from the somewhat shorter incuba- 
tion period, the paratyphoids show certain other differences. 
It is impossible to discriminate clinically between paratyphoids 
A, B, and C. The paratyphoids may have a gradual onset like 
typhoid, but usually it is much more abrupt. Particularly 
in para. B a gastro-intestinal type of onset may occur, with a 
sudden attack of colicky abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and 
vomiting. There is intense headache, which may continue 
throughout the attack, and early prostration. The temperature 
rises rapidly to 101° F., but pyrexia in the paratyphoids, 
especially in para. B, is of shorter duration than in typhoid. 
In para. B the attack may be of only a week or ten days’ 
duration, or may extend to eighteen days ; in para. A the 
typical attack extends over three weeks. In both, the tempera- 
ture chart exhibits a “ spiky ” character, the pyrexia showing 
a range of some two degrees between morning and evening 
temperature. Bradycardia is more common than in typhoid. 
The rash in the paratyphoids appears in crops, and is char- 
acteristically much more abundant, especially in para. A, than 
in typhoid. It may invade the face. The spots are also larger 
and of a deeper colour ; in para. B they may be papular. 
Constipation is common in the paratyphoids. Para. C may 
resemble the ordinary parat 3 ^phoid ; the onset may be of the 
gastro-intestinal type, but acute septicaemio, bronchitic, and 
pneumonic forms have been recorded. 

Tjrpes of Enteric Fever. — Tjphoid, and much more rarely 
paratyphoid, may occur in a fulminating, hyperpyrexia! form, 
death taking place from toxaemia in a few days. Haemorrhagic 
typhoid is very rare and is almost invariably fatal. 

Typhoid or paratyphoid may commence with meningism or 
with true acute meningitis, the specific organisms, in the latter 
cose, being recoverable from the cerebrospinal fluid. In 
infants and young children tho onset of enteric fever is fre- 
quently abrupt and may simulate the ‘‘ acute abdomen.” 
Partic^arly in paratyphoid-B, meningitis, gas tro -enteritis, or 
broncho-pneumonia may dominate the clinical picture in the 
early stages. 

ComplicatioiiB. — These are numerous . Any of them may occur 
in both typhoid and the paratyphoids, although they are, upon the 
whole, much more likely to do so in the case of typhoid fever. 

The major comiilications are most liable to occur from the 
end of the second to the end of the third or beginning of the 
fourth week. The two gravest of these are haemorrhage and 



60 INFEOTIOUS DISEASES 

perforation^ caused by the separation of the' sloughs from 
ulcerated Peyer’s patches. In the process of separation a vessel 
may become eroded, or a tear occur through the tissue remaining 
at the base of the ulcer and through the peritoneal covering 
of the bowel. Myocarditis^ which is usually marked during the 
third week, is the result of toxsemia. Lobar pneumonia, 
whether it occurs, as it may do, at the onset or, more usually, 
during the third week, is due to a secondary pneumococcal 
infection, although typhoid bacilli may be present in the 
sputum. Broncho-pneumonia is not an infrequent terminal 
event, superimposed upon hypostatic congestion. 

Haemorrhage, perforation, and myocarditis must be further 
discussed. 

Hcemorrhage . — Small streaks of blood may be observable 
in the stools during the first week, as the result of the h3rperaBmic 
condition of Peyer’s patches. They are of no importance. 
At any time after the end of the second week, and particularly 
at the end of the third week, haemorrhages of considerable 
magnitude may occur quite suddenly. The patient complains 
of faintness and of abdominal discomfort rather than pain ; 
he becomes pale, and sweat may appear upon the forehead. 
He may be restless with sigliing respirations, and vomiting 
sometimes occurs. The pulse becomes thready, rapid, and 
running, and the temperature falls to subnormal. The blood 
passed per rectum may be bright red or dark, depending on the 
length of time it has remained in the intestine. Hsemorrhages 
may be single or repeated. 

Perforation . — Perforation may be associated with or follow 
haemorrhage, or it may occur independently. Though usually 
single, perforations may be multiple. The most common site 
for their occurrence is from 1 to 2 ft. from the ileo-caecal valve. 
Although perforation is usually a complication of a severe 
attack, or one which has shown recrudescence, it may also 
occur in a mild attack. The majority of perforations occur 
at the end of the third week. The patient suddenly complains 
of acute pain in the lower abdomen, particularly in the right 
iliac fossa. The facial expression becomes anxious and drawn ; 
there may be beads of sweat upon the forehead. The pulse 
and respirations increase and the temperature may show a 
sudden drop, though this is by no means invariable. A rigor 
sometimes takes place. Vomiting at this stage is uncommon. 
There is great tenderness upon palpation of the lower abdomen, 
and the abdominal muscles are “ on guard.” These are the 
early 8:^ptom8 and signs of perforation ; later, signs of general 
peritonitis appear. Disappearance of the liver dullness, which 



TYPHOID AND PARATYPHOID FEVERS 61 

used to be described as one of the cardinal signs of perforation, 
is both inconstant and late. To await it is seriously to diminish 
the patient’s already slender chance of recovery. 

Myocarditis. — Although cardiac involvement may manifest 
itself at any stage, it is particularly liable to do so during the 
third week. The signs and symptoms do not differ from those 
of myocarditis due to any other cause. 

Many other complications are occasionally encountered. 
Perhaps the most frequent is ^phlebitis of the left femoral vein, 
which leads to a femoral thrombosis during the later stages of 
typhoid or in early convalescence. Rarer complications are 
the following : pericarditis and endocarditis, cholecystitis, 
ulcerative laryngitis. Parotitis, which is usually suppurative, 
and orchitis are not very uncommon. Appendicitis, with which 
perforation may be confused, is an occasional complication. 
Otitis media, osteitis of the long bones with abscess formation, 
myositis, resulting in rupture and ecchymoses due to haemor- 
rhages, are aU complications which occur in the later stages or 
during convalescence. Spondylitis Typhoid Spine ”) has 
already been mentioned {vide p. 36). 

Associated Diseases. — Double infections of typhoid and para- 
typhoid occur. In the tropics the water which has caused 
typhoid may also contain the organisms of other water-borne 
diseases, and these may occur together with typhoid, or rather, 
since the incubation periods are shorter, precede it in the same 
patient. Double infections of cholera and typhoid, and bacillary 
or amcebic dysentery and typhoid are not uncommon. Attacks 
of malaria or relapsing fever during the course of typhoid are 
sometimes encountered. Diphtheria is not imcommon in 
association with typhoid or paratj-phoid. 

SequelsB. — Mental dullness may persist for a long period 
iifivY the attack, and occasionally true psychoses result. Various 
organic nerve lesions have been recorded, tlironic cholecystitis 
is an important sequel, as it may be associated with a carrier 
state. Bone abscesses may make their first api^earance years 
after the attack. Alopecia, particularly in children, may be 
an unsightly sequel. 

Diagnosis. — ^The diagnosis of typhoid or paratyphoid is 
seldom more than suspected on clinic^ grounds during the first 
few days. Many other acute infections may give rise to error 
such as pnetimonia, influenza, smallpox, cerebrospinal fever, 
typhus fever, malaria, undulant fever either of the melitensis or 
abortus type, miliary tuberculosis, and tuberculous meningitis. 
Suspicion of the nature of the condition will be arous^ if 
the history, the mode of onset, and the symptoms, which have 



62 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

already been described, are carefully weighed. Considerable 
assistance will be afforded by the ch^acter of the temperature 
chart. In the paratyphoids early diagnosis may be even more 
difficult, especially in the mild forms and in those with a 
gastro-intestinal onset. After the first week the persistence 
of the symptoms, the appearance of the eruption, the palpable 
spleen, and the passing of the typical “ pea-soup stools 
should make the clinical diagnosis certain. 

Laboratory Diagnosis. — Three laboratory tests are available. 

1. Blood Culture , — A large proportion of positive results 
may be obtained if blood culture be performed during the first 
week of enteric. This procedure should always be adopted 
after four days of pyrexia when there is any suspicion of 
enteric. At least 5 c.c, of blood, collected under strictly 
aseptic conditions, should be introduced at once into bile salt 
medium and sent to the laboratory for incubation. 

2. Agglutination Tests (Widal and Weil-Fdix Modification), 
— Agglutinins in sufficient quantities to produce a positive 
Widal test appear in the blood serum witliin eight to fourteen 
days of the onset. The lowest titre of the serum which can be 
regarded as significant varies with the type of enteric organisms 
and with other factors. Of more importance than a single test, 
e,g,y agglutination by a dilution of 1 in 50 is a rising Hire, 
e,g,, from 1 in 10 to 1 in 30 during the second week of 
the disease. 

The antigenic structure of each organism is complex ; at 
least three t\q>es of agglutinins appear, distinguishable by the 
rate of clumping and its form : (i) Somatic (O^agglulinins) ; 
their appearance is indicative of an active infection, (ii) 
Flagellar ( H -agglutinins), type-specific ; provide information 
as to the particular organism responsible. (iii) Croup 
agglutinins (also flagellar) are common to all Salmonella 
organisms except tj'phoid. Their presence is indicative of a 
Salmonella infection but gives no information as to the particular 
organism responsible. The Weil-Felix modification of the 
Widal test involves testing for these different agglutinins. In 
typhoid fever a V i-agglulinin (indicative of virulence) is 
described by Felix. 

In those who have previously been inoculated with typhoid- 
paratyphoid vaccine (T.A.B.C.) a single test is of little value in 
detecting the presence of an active infection. Most information 
is obtained from a rising titre of 0-agglutinins, since, in the 
inoculated, H-agglutinins may rise during any febrile illness 
{Anamnestic reaction), 

3. Examination of Stools and Urine , — The specific orgamsms 



TYPHOID AND PARATYPHOID FEVERS 


63 


by the use of certain culture media may, in the case of Bact, 
paratyphi- B at least, be recovered from the stools in a high 
proportion of cases during the first week of the illness. They 
are still more likely to be isolated from both stools and urine 
during the second week and onwards. 

Treatment. — ^The treatment of typhoid may conveniently 
be considered under the following headings : (1) general, 

(2) dietetic, (3) symptomatic, and (4) specific. 

1. OeneraL — Absolute rest is imjierative from the earliest 
possible moment until the temperature has remained normal 
for at least ten da3rB. With the exception of diphtheria, there 
is no acute infection in which limitation of movement upon the 
part of the patient is so essential. This is not the same thing 
as saying that the patient must not be moved. Preferably 
nursed upon a sorbo-rubber bed, the patient’s posture must be 
skilfully changed by the nurse at fairly frequent intervals 
during the twenty-four hours lest pressure -sores result. These 
may readily occur and are a serious comphcation. Sudden 
movements by the patient and abrupt movement of the patient 
by the nurse must be avoided. 

2. Dietetic . — The next essential is a suitable diet. The 
tendency at the present time is to allow typhoid patients, 
even during the acute stages of the disease, a far more liberal 
diet than that usually given in the past, including such articles 
of food as thin bread and butter without crust, minced meat, 
and pounded fish. Mashed potatoes, custards, junkets, and 
eggs, either raw or soft-boiled, are also permissible. In severe 
cases with digestive disturbances the basis of the diet must be 
milk, supplemented by ample quantities of v'Uter. “Milk” is 
underst^Kxi to include such variations in flavouring and later 
slight thickening as may be devised to relieve the monotony. 
The patient should consume, in small amounts at a time, 
not less than three pints of milk in the twent^^-four hours. 
Lemon water and weak tea and coffee may be allowed. Small 
amounts of milk chocolate are well tolerated, especially by 
children. Meat juice or extract may be given to add variety. 
The patient should be encouraged to take large quantities of 
fluids, and to these plenty of glucose should be added. This 
form of carbohydrate is better tolerated than is ordinary cane 
sugar, which in large amounts is liable to cause nausea. 

There is no evidence that a liberal diet increases the risk 
of hsemorrhage or of perforation, while it certainly helps to 
maintain the patient’s strength and to shorten the period of 
convalescence. While the juice of fruits, such aa oranges 
or lemons, is beneficial, it is most imi)ortant to prevent the 



64 INFECrriOUS DISEASES 

patient from eating those portions of fruit which contain much 
unabsorbable celliUose. There is little point in giving alcohol 
as a routine. If its administration be considered advisable to 
tide over a period of great weakness, a dry champagne is the 
most suitable form to employ. 

Apart from the effects of the disease itself, a milk diet tends 
to produce a furred tongue and an unwholesome condition of 
the mouth. The hygiene of the mouth is very important, and 
frequent cleansing of the tongue, teeth, gums, and lips is 
necessary. 

3. Symptomatic — (a) Reduction of Pyrexia . — This is best 
attained by means of warm or tepid sponging. The morp 
drastic methods of packs and baths should be avoided. The 
sponging must be carried out as expeditiously and with as 
little disturbance of the patient as possible. Antipyretic 
drugs must be avoided, as most of them depress the heart. 

(6) Abdominal Distension is best minimised by careful 
regulation of the diet. Intestinal antiseptics such as beta- 
naphthol and salol possess little, if an}% real value. The same 
may be said of hexamine, which, moreover, may produce cystitis. 

(c) HcBmorrhage . — Absolute quiet should be secured. If 
syncope threaten, the foot of the bed should be raised upon 
blocks. An ice-bag should be placed over the lower abdomen, 
and ice given to suck. A starch and opium enema is sometimes 
of value in mild cases, but for severe haemorrhage morphia in 
a dose of J gr. is necessary. In severe collapse, intravenous 
saline or blood transfusion should be given ; for cardiac failure, 
nikethamide (coramiiie) should be injected. 

(d) Perforation , — Treatment is surgical, and its success 
depends almost entirely on early diagnosis. If operation be 
delayed for over twenty-four hours, death is almost invariable. 
Even under favourable ciicumstances the mortality of perfora- 
tion is over 50 per cent. 

(e) Myocardial Involvement . — The foot of the bed should be 
raised, an ice-bag placed over the praecordium, and cardiac 
stimulants applied. 

Careful watch must be kept for retention of urine, which 
must be treated by catheterisation. Other complications must 
be treated as they arise. 

4. Specific. — Promising results have attended the use of 
Felix’s ‘‘ Vi-serum ” which contains anti-bodies to the so-called 
‘‘ 0,” “H,” and “Vi” antigens of Bact. typhi (not Bad. 
paraiyphiy be it noted). The serum must be given repeatedly 
and in full doses early in the attack. Sulphapyridine is valuable 
for bacilluria. 



CEREBROSPINAL FEVER 66 

Mode ol Spread and Prevention. — It has already been 
pointed out that enteric infeotions are derived indirectly from 
contaminated water supplies, milk or food, or directly from a 
case of the disease or a carrier. 

In most cities and towns in civilised countries the water 
supply and the system of sewage disposal are satisfactory. 
In villages, cesspools still persist which may contaminate, by 
leakage and percolation, the wells from which drinking water 
is drawn, especially if these be in the chalk. In war time, 
water supplies must be chlorinated. Milk should be pasteurised. 
The breeding places of flies, such as stable manure, mxist be 
dealt with, and all food must be kept covered. The search 
for and segregation of ceurriers until they are bacteriologically 
free, or failing this, their continued supervision, is important. 
The individual case of typhoid must be segregated until at 
least three consecutive specimens of mine and fseoes have been 
shown to be bacteriologically free. Disinfection of the stools 
and urine of the patient before disposal, and of linen and 
garments before being sent to the laundry, is imperative. 
Special precautions must be taken by nurses ; the nails must 
be kept short ; on no account must food or drink be taken 
before the hands have been well scrubbed, and then never in 
the environment of the patient. They should also be protected 
by inoculation. 

Inoculation is also essential for those living in localities 
where the disease is prevalent and for troops proceeding abroad. 
The vaccine is a mixture of Bad, lyphi and Bad, paratyphi 
A, B, and C (T.A.B.C.). The strains now used are alcohol 
killed and rich in Vi antigens ; these provoke the best and 
most lasting antigenic response. 

The mixed vaccine contains in 1 c.c. 1,000 million Bad, 
iijphi and 600 millio!i of each of the Bad, paratyphi. Two 
doses are given at an interval of three weeks, the first of 
0*25 c.e, and the second 0*5 c.c. A further injection should 
be made a year later if the person is still at risk. 

CEREBROSPINAL FEVER 

( Epidemic CerebroapiruU Meningitis : Spotted Fever) 

iEtiology. — Cerebrospinal fever is caused by the Neisseria 
meningitidis (meningococcus). The organism is disseminated 
hy droplet spray, and this is particularly liable to occur imder 
conditions, of overcrowding, especially in sleeping quarters, 

in dormitories and barracks. Formidable epidemics tend to 



66 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

appear during war, as in 1915-17 and in 1940. In England 
and Wales, 3,712 cases were notified in 1916 and 12,771 in 
1940 ; but, whereas the case fatality rate in 1915 was 59 per 
cent, at aU ages, in 1940 it was 20 per cent. This fall was 
chiefly due to chemotherapy, since there was no indication in 
1940 of a less severe clinical type. In the inter-epidemic phase 
the disease is represented by sporadic cases among infants and 
young children of the posterior basic type, the sources of 
infection being mild unrecognised cases and healthy carriers. 

Glover has shown that a wave of high (non-contact) carrier 
rates precedes and accompanies an epidemic. Both contact 
and convalescent carriers occur and the carrier state tends to 
be prolonged by an unhealthy condition of the nasopharyngeal 
mucosa. Although sporadic cases may occur at any season, 
epidemics usually c6mmence in winter and spring when catarrhal 
states are prevalent and propinquity is greater in degree. 
Indeed, some have maintained that epidemics really consist 
of epidemic nasopharyngeal catarrh with occasional fom- 
phcating meningitis and that there is thus a meningococcal 
nasopharyngitis as distinct from the carrier state. The term 
cerebrospinal fever imphes an invasion from the nasopharynx 
of the blood-stream followed by a localisation of the organism 
upon the meninges. 

In the inter-epidemic phase the greatest incidence of the 
disease is among children under five and especially tmder three, 
but during epidemics, as might be expected from the age groups 
of those chiefly at risk, incidence also falls bea\ily upon adults 
up to the age of forty-five. 

As already indicated, chemotherapy has transformed 
prognosis at all ages ; whereas the posterior basic type might 
have a fatality rate of 75 per cent., this is now capable of 
reduction to a quarter of that figure. At all ages, among cases 
effectively treated in hospital with the sulphonamides, the 
fatality rate now ranges between 9 and 10 per cent. 

Bacteriology. — The Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) 
is a gram-negative diplococcus resembling the gonococcus ; 
it dies rapidly outside the body unless kept at blood heat, a 
point of practical importance in the collection of specimens 
for laboratory examination. It occurs in the nasopharynx of 
carriers and in the cerebrospinal fluid of cases of the disease ; 
it may also be recovered from the blood and, in certain cases, 
from the joints. 

Meningococci conform to one of four types arranged in two 
grou^. For serum therapy prior determination of the group 
was important, but since the sulphonamides have displaced 



CEREBROSPINAL FEVER 


67 


serum and are equally effective against Group I. and II. 
organisms, grouping, based upon agglutination reactions, has 
lost its clinical significance. 

Pathology. — The distinctive lesions affect cerebral tissues. 
Pus occurs in the pia-arachnoid mesh (subarachnoid space) 
and is most evident at the base, over the cerebrum and in 
the fissures, aroimd the cerebellar vessels and doTpn the posterior 
aspect of the spinal cord. The cerebral substance is soft and 
may show haemorrhages ; the ventricles contain some excess 
of turbid fluid. In those who have died at a later stage, and 
particularly following the posterior basic form in infants, 
varying degrees of hydrocephalic distension and thinning of 
the ventricular walls may be seen. The choroidal plexus 
shows engorgement. Pus may be found at autopsy in the 
pericau’dium and in the joints ; frequently there are small 
septic foci in the kidneys. Myocardial degeneration is common 
but endocarditis is rare. 

Incubation Period. — In the epidemic form the period is from 
one to three da 3 rs ; in the sporadic form, firom four to five days. 

Clinical Description. — Cerebrospinal fever imphes two patho- 
logical processes : meningococcal septicaemia and meningococcal 
cerebrospinal meningitis. Septicaemia may occur without 
meningeal involvement ; it is then only to be differentiated 
from septicaemias due to other orgamisms by the results of blood 
culture. Septicaemia precedes meningeal localisation of the 
organism and may dominate the cli^cal picture, as in the 
fulminating type of the disease, where death taikes place before 
the full development of meningitis ; it may play an important 
part in the symptom-complex, the signs and symptoms of 
meningeal involvement being complicated by a coexistent 
septicaemia ; or it may be transient, and succeeded by a clinical 
picture which is due to meningitis alone. 

The epidemic form of the disease in adults may be classified 
into the following olinicafi types : (1) fulminating ; (2) hyper- 
acute ; (3) acute ; (4) subausute or mild. These types vary in 
severity, but do not form well-defined groups. T^e spora^iic 
form of the disease in infants known as posterior basic meningitis 
is described separately. 

The stage of invasion may be regarded as a prodromal 
septicssmia. Onset is abrupt with intense headache, firontsJ 
or occipito-firontal, pain in the lumbar region and legs, 
vomiting, often projectile, shivering, rigors, or convulsions in 
the child, pyrexia of 102*’- 103° or more, and sometimes 
delirium. Th^ symptoms may continue and become intensi- 
fied for a period varying from twenty-four hours to sometimes 



68 INFECnOUS DISEASES 

as long as three or four days. OooasionaUy there is a remission 
of severity after the first twenty-four hours, but the symptoms 
return with increased intensity. During this stage, and before 
the appearance of meningeal symptoms, peteohiae may be seen 
upon the back and abdomen, less firequently upon other parte 
of the body. Coalescence of petechiae may, in severe oases, 
result in purpuric blotches. That these petechias are caused 
by septicaemia is evident fixtm the fact that the meningococcus 
has been recovered from them. Erythematous rashes, scarla- 
tiniform or morbilliform in type, may also appear during this 
phase. Both types of eruption may make their first appearance 
when meningitis has become manifest, but they are none the 
less septicaemic manifestations. Petechiae occur most con- 
stantly in the severe “ epidemic ” form of the disease ; in 
sporadic cases they are less common. Herpes facialis and labialis 
vary in their incidence in different epidemics. Owing to 
instability of the vasomotor system, tache cerebrale can be 
produced but is not diagnostic of meningitis. 

The meningead stage is characterised by the continuance 
and exacerbation of headache which becomes excruciating ; 
pain in the back, especially in the lumbar region, becomes more 
marked and is often accompanied by hyperaesthesia. Rigidity 
of the neck is a very early and constant sign, which renders 
flexion impossible. Photophobia is frequent, and the patient 
is irritable and resents disturbance for any purpose. Rigidity 
of the neck is succeeded by retraction of the head, which may 
become extreme and a position of opisthotonos may be assumed. 
The abdomen is retracted. The pupils are dilated and the 
light reflex is sluggish. Usually there is moderately increased 
rapidity of the pulse, but occasionally bradycardia occurs, and 
the blood pressure is low. The temperature in cerebrospinal 
fever is most variable, but usually at this stage is maintained 
round about 103° or 104°. Temperature is influenced largely, 
no doubt, by coincident septicaemia. Kemig’s sign and 
Brudzinski’s neck sign can almost always be elicited. The 
knw jerks may be brisk or absent, and the plantar response 
is indefinite ; the abdominal reflexes are usually present. The 
blood always shows a leucocytosis of firom 20,000 to 30,000. 

The cerebroapimU fluid, obtained by lumbar or cisternal 
puncture in children and adults, and occasionally by intra- 
ventricular punctiure through a lateral angle of the anterior 
fontanelle in infants, completes and confirms the clinicw.1 
evidence.^ Before the onset of true meningeal symptoms, the 
oerebrospmal fluid, although under pressure, may be clear 
wid capable of reducing Fehling’s solution. The puncture 



CEREBROSPINAL FEVER 69 

fluid obtained in the meningeal stage is always under increased 
pressure and may spurt from the cannula. It is turbid, and 
may contain flakes of pus ; occasionally it is so thickly purulent 
as to escape with difficulty from the cannula. The presence of 
blood is probably always to be ascribed to trauma produced in 
introducing the lumbar puncture needle into the intrathecal 
space. Cytological examination of the fluid shows a great 
increase in the polymorphonuclear leucoc 5 rtes. Gram-negative 
diplococci can be seen, both intra-ceUular and extra-cellular. 
The proportion of intra-cellular to extra-cellular organisms 
has some prognostic value, a preponderance of intra-cellular 
diplococci being of more favourable import. Cultures made 
immediately upon blood-agar, and incubated without delay, will 
yield colonies of the meningococcus. The protein content is 
increased and the chlorides diminished. There is no reduction 
of Fehling’s solution. It should be added that these changes 
are common to any purulent meningitis. 

The course of the epidemic form varies. Death may occur 
in a few hours or a few days from onset in the fulminating or 
hyperacute types, or the patient may recover from the acute 
phase and die from some complication or from asthenia later. 
Recrudescences are common ; relapses not rare. The usual 
type of temperature is intermittent, with a tendency to irregu- 
larity. This intermittent pyrexia may continue for three weeks 
or more. The acute phase may end by crisis and recovery 
or in fatal hyperpjrexia. It must be stressed that these remarks 
apply to the untreated or imperfectly treated case. With 
adequate chemotherapy recover}" is the rule and is soon 
brought about. 

Ilecovery is heralded by the disappearance of all objective 
and subjective signs of meningitis ; the temperature falls, and 
the mental condition which was previously clouded to a greater 
or lesser degree becomes normal. WTien the acute phase is at 
an end the cerebrospinal fluid no longer escapes under pressvue, 
and is dear. The cell count is normal and diplococci are no 
longer to be seen ; the fluid is sterile on culture and its power 
to reduce Folding’s solution returns. 

Posterior Basic Meningitis. — ^A. C. Hanvpson regards this 
condition as a sequel in infants to a mild attack of acute men- 
ingitis which has escaped diagnosis or of one in which the 
treatment of the acute phase has not been effective. Thick 
purulent exudate at the base of the brain results in the dosure 
of the foramina of Magendie and Luschka connecting the sub- 
arachnoid space with the ventricular system. There is marked 
head retraction and bulging of the anterior fontanelle. Lumbar 



70 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


puncture frequently results in a dry tap and cisternal puncture 
may be necessary. Unless drainage of the cerebrospinal fluid, 
which is produced in excess, can be re-estabUshed, hydro- 
cephalus ensues, and this entails ultimate death or, at best, 
mental defect with or without blindness of central origin. 
The effective treatment of cerebrospinal fever now possible 
by means of sulphapyridine or sulphathiazole makes the 
occurrence of hydrocephalus unlikely. 

Chronic Meningococcal Septicaemia. — During the epidemic 
of cerebrospinal fever which has occurred since the outbreak 
of war a number of cases of chronic meningococcal septicaemia 
have been described without meningitis. The onset is sudden 
with fever, headache, and pains in the joints and muscles. 
After a few days a skin eruption appears consisting of pink or 
red macules, papules and nodules which are often tender, but 
rarely haemorrhagic, at any rate at the onset. The condition 
is apt to be misdiagnosed as subacute rheumatism or erythema 
multiforme. Although the pyrexia may last for weeks, the 
patient often does not appear to be seriously ill. Blood culture 
may give a growth of meningococci. Sulphapyridine produces 
rapid cure, but if the drug is not given meningococcal meningitis 
often supervenes. 

Complications. — During the acute phase retention of urine 
is common. Incontinence of urine and faeces may also occur. 
Broncho-pneumonia may prove troublesome and fatal. Septic 
arthritis, the meningococcus being present in the pus, occurs 
occasionally. The following complications affecting the nervous 
system may occur : hemiplegia, involving the face and limbs ; 
I)eripheral paralyses, caused by the involvement of spinal nerve 
roots in the inflammatory exudate, may make their appearance 
in the limbs, particularly the lower Ihnbs. Various types of 
mental abnormality occur during the acute meningeal stage, 
and disappear when this stage subsides. More serious are the 
mental states which may develop during convalescence. These 
vary from peculiarities of behaviour to definite dementia ; 
impairment of memory is common. In the majority of cases 
these mental conditions disappear in time, but certain of them 
remain permanently. Hydr^phalus is, however, the most 
frequent and important neurological complication {ikde p. 776). 

Ocular Complications comprise strabismus, ptosis, and 
nystagmus. Conjunctivitis is common. Keratitis associated 
with perforating ulcer and hypopyon may occur and iritis and 
optic neuritis are also met with. 

Aural Complications . — Otitis media may occur early and 
is due to direct spread of infection fix)m the nasopharynx. 



CEREBROSPINAL FEVER 71 

Nerve deafness may occur, and may disappear in convalescence ; 
often, however, it persists. 

Diagnosis. — ^In the septiosemic stage it may be impossible to 
distinguish the condition from other acute diseases with a 
similar form of onset. Such diverse conditions as pneumonia, 
influenza, hypertoxio scarlet fever, smallpox, typhoid, typhus, 
relapsing fever, plague, and heatstroke have been confrtsed. 
The petechial rash has been diagnosed as that of typhus and 
hsemorrhagic smallpox. In the meningeal stage the diagnosis 
is confirmed by the examination of the cerebrospinal fluid. 
Pneumococcal and streptococcal meningitis are clinically 
indistinguishable, but are usually secondary to a primary focus 
elsewhere. It is a wise precaution, as advocated by Mexner, 
to swab the nasophaiynx. Meningococci may be found in the 
nasopharyngeal secretion even if absent from the cerebrospinal 
fluid at the time of the first puncture. 

Treatment. — ^The sulphonamides are essential and must be 
given in massive doses at the earliest possible moment, repeated 
at four-hourly intervals in order to maintain a sufficient 
concentration of the drug in the blood stream and cerebrospinal 
fluid. In the former this level should be from 10 to 15 mg. 
per 100 c.c. and in the latter 5 mg. per 100 c.c. For adults 
the initial dose of sulphapyridine should be one of 2 grm. 
given by mouth and during the first forty -eight hours a total 
daily dose of 9 grm. is prescribed. Subsequently the amount is 
halved and later reduced to one-third (the fotir-hourly intervals 
being maintained). For children, half these doses siiffice. In 
severe oases the first and second doses should be given intra- 
venously. Orally, sulphathiazole is sometimes better tolerated 
than sulphapyriffine. Frirther details regarding the use of the 
sulphonamides and toxic reactions which may be produced 
are given on page 8. 

Lumbar puncture must be performed at the outset to 
confirm the diagnosis and should be repeated at intervals 
to gauge progress. Adequate chemotherapy renders therapeutic 
lumbar pimctures unnecessary. Anti-meningococcal serum is 
falling into disuse ; if employed at all it must be regarded as 
secondary to chemotherapy and a single dose (50 to 100 c.c.) 
of polyvalent serum injected by the intravenous route. 
Intrathecal therapy is not now employed either for 
sulphonamide or serum. 

Preventioii. — Isolation should be maintained for at least 
two weeks after the onset, or until two negative nasopharyngeal 
swabbings have been obtained at four-day intervals. Con- 
ciuront disinfeotion of nasal and oral discharges is important. 



72 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

Efficient masks should be worn by attendants. Contacts and 
carriers of meningococci should be kept under observation 
until shown to be bacteriologically free. Promising results in 
the clearance of carriers have been obtained with sulphapyridine 
by Fairbrother. They should be encouraged to obtain abundant 
fresh air and exercise. In the presence of an outbreak, attention 
to general health and hygiene is important. Particular care 
must be taken to ensure that proper spacing in sleeping quarters 
is available. During prevalence of the disease the kissing of 
children should be avoided, particularly by those who have 
been in contact with a case. 

E. H. R. Harries. 


SEPTICAEMIA 

The discovery of bacteria in the circulating blood indicates 
a bdctericemia. This condition probably occurs fairly frequently 
without producing severe symptoms. Thus streptococci and 
other organisms have been demonstrated in blood cultures 
taken soon after minor operations, such as tooth extraction 
or tonsillectomy. By the term septicoBmia, however, more is 
meant than the presence of organisms in the blood. Septi- 
caemia indicates a clinical condition, which usually results from 
the presence of haemolytic streptococci or staphylococci in the 
blood stream. Septicaemia due to either of these organisms is 
an acute condition, but when the infecting organism is the 
Streptococcus viridans an entirely different clinical picture is 
produced, which is known as subacute bacterial endocarditis 
{vide p. 533). Septicaemic phases also occur in infections by 
organisms other than the streptococci and staphylococci. 
Thus in the early stages of pneumococcal pneumonia, the 
enteric fevers and meningococcal meningitis blood cultures 
may be positive, but this is usually only a transient finding. 

Streptococcal Septicsemia. — ^The source of infection is often 
obvious and of a local nature, such as cellulitis, whitlow, a 
finger pricked at operation or autopsy, tonsillitis, or uterine 
infection. In some cases septictemia may occur without an 
obvious focus. The development of septicaemia probably 
depends mainly on the virulence of the infecting organisms 
and the resistance of the tissues to infection. Thus when the 
resistance is lowered by the presence of a chronic disorder, for 
instance Graves' disease, a virulent septicaemia is liable to occur 
as a terminal event. 



fiEPnC^MIA 


73 


The onset of streptococcal septicaemia is abrupt. If there 
is a local lesion a lymphangitis is often visible, and the patient 
presents certain clinical symptoms which point to blood-stream 
infection. The most important and constant of these is the 
occurrence of rigors ; should these occur in the presence of a 
septic focus, they almost certainly indicate a septicaemia, and 
blood culture is likely to be positive. Fever of an irregular 
type is almost invariable, usually much higher at night than 
in the morning, and continued sometimes over a period of many 
weeks. Two other important symptoms are progressive 
anaemia of hypochromic type and troublesome diarrhoea, which 
fails to reau3t to the ordinary remedies. The tongue is smooth, 
red, desquamated, and often sore. The urine generally contains 
albumen, casts, and sometimes red blood cells. The skin may 
show erythematous rashes and petechiae, and the spleen is 
often slightly enlarged. When metastatic abscesses are formed 
the condition is often described as pycemia rather than 
septicaemia. Such abscesses are specially likely to develop 
in the pericardium, pleura, or joints. It is important to watch 
carefully for the development of symptoms pointing to 
formation of pus, as their reUef by surgical drainage is essential. 

Staphylococcal Septicaemia. — Infections by the Staphylo- 
coc^iis auretis are usually primarily on the skin, and this organism 
is responsible for boils and carbuncles. The amount of general 
constitutional disturbance may be slight w hile the inflammatory 
process remains localised, but if the organisms reach the blood- 
stream, either as a result of lowered tissue resistance or ill- 
judged surgical measures, a septicaemia may be produced in 
which metastatic abscesses are striking features. These may 
he found most commonly in the bones, in the perinephric 
tissues arising from a staphylococcal abscess of the renal cortex, 
in the pericardium, pleura or elsewhere. Not infrequently 
there may be a latent period of days or weeks between the 
occurrence of a boil and the development of symptoms pointing 
to a metastatic staphylococcal lesion, such as a perinephric 
abscess. Often, indeed, blood culture is negative, but a transient 
staphylococcal bacteriajmia must be presumed. In every case 
of prolonged pyrexia without obvious cause the possibility 
of a staphylococcal abscess must be borne in mind, particularly 
if there is a polymorphonuclear leucocytosis. P^exia may 
continue for several weeks before tenderness or bulging in the 
loin points to a perinephric abscess. Symptoms may also be 
misleading. Localised staphylococcal abscesses in the lungs 
may cause haemoptysis and lead to a mistaken diagnosis of 
pulmonary tuberculosis. Spasm of the psoas due to perinephric 



74 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

infection may simulate disease of the hip joint, or an osteo- 
myelitis, especially in a child, may be misdiagnosed as acute 
rheumatism. 

Usually staphylococcal septicsemia is less acute in onset 
than is streptococcal septicaemia. When localised metastatic 
abscesses are formed, if these can be adequately drained the 
outlook is relatively good, and it is remarkable that desperately 
ill patients may ultimately make a complete recovery after a 
long illnesss with multiple foci of infection such as empyema, 
pulmonary or perinephric abscesses. 

Treatment ol Septicsemia. — The risk of generalised infection 
can be minimised by careful treatment of local inflammatory 
conditions and particularly by the avoidance of premature 
surgical drainage. Moreover, especially in staphylococcal in- 
fections, such as multiple boils or carbuncles, the likelihood 
of a septicaemia can be diminished by due attention to the 
general health of the patient, who should be advised to take a 
prolonged holiday following septic infections. 

There are two main asjyects of the treatment of septicaemia 
whether streptococcal or staphylococcal ; (1) Measures designed 
to improve and maintain the resistance and nutrition of the 
patient ; (2) chemotherapy. The former are of importance 
and include good nursing, a large fluid intake, if possible 6 pints 
per diem, glucose and an alkaline mixture. Morphia may be 
necessary for pain and sleeplessness. The patient must be 
frequently examined to detect localised suppuration. Hypo- 
dermic injections of nikethamide (2 c.c. of 25 per cent, solution) 
may counteract collapse. Repeated blood transfusions, not 
more than 10 oz. at a time, are of undoubted value even if the 
patient is not strikingly ansemic. If the temperature is above 
104°, tepid sponging is advisable. Quite apart from the lowering 
of temperature produced, the patient feels more comfortable. 
As the disease is often prolonged, a nutritious diet should be 
allowed, together with large amounts of fluid. 

The marvellous results of chemotherapy with sulphonamides 
are fully established in most forms of septicaemia, except perhaps 
that due to the staphylococcus, where penicillin is undoubtedly 
of great value {vide p. 11). 


RHEUMATIC FEVER 

Rheumatic fever, or, as it is often called, acute rheumatism, 
is a specific disease characterised by fever, arthritis of a well- 
defined type, and a tendency to involve the heart. It certainly 



75 


RHEUMATIC FEVER 

haa no connection with the degenerative forms of arthritis 
known as osteo-arthritis, and its clinical picture and age 
incidence does not resemble infective or rheumatoid arthritis. 

i&tiology. — ^Rheumatic fever is primarily a disease of 
temperate climates in the northern hemisphere. It is par- 
ticularly common in England, more especially in the larger 
cities where overcrowding is prevalent. It is essentially a 
disease of childhood and adolescence, and is almost unknown 
over the age of thirty, except in persons who have already 
had a previous attack. There is no conclusive evidence that 
the disease is hereditary. It is particularly common in districts 
which, besides being overcrowded, are low-lying and damp. 

The cause of rheumatic fever is still unknown. There is 
considerable evidence that the disease occurs in children who 
some ten days previously have suffered from tonsillar infections 
writh hsemolytic streptococci. Although there is little bacterio- 
logical evidence to prove that the disease is directly due to 
streptococcal infection, it is possible that the presence of such 
an infection may in some way produce a sensitisation, which 
may eventually manifest itself as the symptom complex 
recognised as rheumatic fever. It has also been suggested 
that the disease is due to a virus. Probably several factors are 
necessary for the development of acute rheumatism, in which 
both streptococcal infection and allergy may play a part. 

Symptoms. — There is frequently an association between 
rheumatic fever and chorea. Sometimes chorea may develop 
in a patient who has previously suffered from rheumatic fever, 
and in chorea the heart often becomes involved exactly 
as it is in rheumatic fever {vide article on Chorea, p. 832). 
In most cases rheumatic fever has a gradual onset with vague 
pains in the limbs, general malaise, and frequently a sore 
throat. The temperature soon rises, and ranges from 102''- 104° 
as the disease becomes well established. 

JoirUs , — ^The most characteristic features about the joints 
in acute rheumatism are that the pain flits from joint to joint 
and that the arthritis is always mifltiple. Most commonly the 
larger joints such as knees, ankles, and shoulders are first 
affected, while the small joints are usually spared. Although 
the pain may be severe, particularly on movement or pressure, 
there is remarkably little to see on examining the affected 
joint. Frequently nothing abnormal can be detected, but 
sometimes the skin may be flushed or the joint slightly swollen 
by an effusion of fluid. The skin never becomes glazed, 
indurated, or oedematous, as may often be the case with pyaemic 
joints. In the course of a day or two the joints first affected 



76 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

become free from pain and tenderness, while other joints 
begin to be involved in a similar manner. 

Skin , — In severe rheumatic fever, particularly in adults, 
sweating is profuse and sometimes there is a diffuse eryiihema, 
which has no clinical significance. 

Beneath the skin, but not actually in it, there are some- 
times multiple discrete lumps about the size of a pea, which have 
been termed rheumaiic nodules. Occurring mainly in children, 
they always indicate a severe infection, usually with cardiac in- 
volvement. The commonest sites for their occurrence are around 
the wrists, elbows, and over the superior occipital protuberances. 

Blood . — A hypochromic aneemia develops rapidly and the 
leucocyte count is usually high, about 16,000 to 20,000. 

Heart . — No infection is more prone to attack the heart than 
rheumatic fever, and it is this feature which renders the disease 
so serious. In every case, however mild, there is some degree 
of myocarditis, as exemplified by the tachycardia which often 
persists for some time after the temperature has fallen and 
joint symptoms have disappeared. The first sound at the 
apex is muffled in character and a soft systolic murmur 
may develop, perhaps as a result of dilatation of the mitral 
ring. In about 50 per cent, of cases there is evidence of a 
de^te endocarditis, which affects most commonly the mitral 
valve, often both mitral and aortic, and rarely the aortic alone. 
A systolic murmur, blowing in character, best heard at the apex, 
and propagated into the axilla, often indicates mitral endo- 
carditis. With involvement of the aortic valve a soft diastolic 
bruit is heard either over the base of the heart or along the 
edges of the sternum. In addition, pericarditis may occur, 
particularly in severe cases or in recurrent attacks. It may 
be accompanied by left-sided pleurisy. The heart lesions of 
rheumatic fever are dealt wdth in more detiiil in the section on 
“ Diseases of the Heart.” 

Pyrexiar-ln children the temperature is seldom above 102°, 
but in adults it is often higher. Hyperpyrexia, common before 
treatment with salicylates, is now almo^ unknown. 

Types of Bheumatic Fever. — The disease as described above 
is such as is seen in severe cases in yoimg adults. In children 
the joint symptoms are usually much less marked ; it is quite 
the exception under fifteen years of age for any definite swelling 
of the joints to occur, and often the pain is much less than in 
adults. In some cases, indeed, there may be no noticeable 
arthritis at all, and the diagnosis depends on the development 
of cardiac lesions. These are much more frequent and severe in 
children than in adults. The mild type of the disease as s een in 



RHEUMATIC FEVER 


77 


children is often called subacute rheumatism. The temperature 
is only slightly raised with vague aching in the joints, consider- 
able impairment of the general health, and some anaemia ; such 
cases may be associated with cardiac involvement. 

Differential Diagnosis. — ^There is one pitfall in the diagnosis 
of rheumatic fever which may cost the practitioner his reputa- 
tion and the patient his life, namely, a mistaken diagnosis of 
acute rheumatism in a case of osteomyelitis. Attention to the 
maxim that rheumatic fever should never be diagnosed in a 
monarticular arthritis will go a long way towards avoiding so 
disastrous an error. Further, in osteomyelitis the skin over 
and surrounding the joint has a red, glazed appearance, and 
often pits on pressure. In addition, a point of acute tenderness 
can usually be made out over the site of the disease in the bone. 

Acute rheumatoid arthritis (vide p. 745) may simulate 
rheumatic fever, but the joints involved usually include the 
small joints of the hands, the cervical spine, and often the 
temporo-mandibular joints, all of which are but rarely affected 
in rheumatic fever. Moreover the pain does not flit from 
joint to joint, and periarticular thickening and deformity of 
the affected joints occur early with striking muscular wasting. 

A multiple arthritis may occur in the course of many diseases 
such as pneumonia, dysentery, scarlet fever, pyaemia, syphilis, 
gout, and typhoid, or it may follow gonorrhoea. 

Failure of the pjTexia and pain to react to adequate treat- 
ment with salicylates is strong presumptive evidence that the 
case is not one of acute rheumatism. 

Treatment. — ^The main object in the treatment of rheumatic 
fever is to avoid cardiac complications with their attendant 
menace of chronic valvular dis^e. Only too often in spite of 
everything endocarditis develops, but there can be no doubt 
that absolute rest in bed from the onset, with^ careful nursing 
go far to prevent heart disease. Owing to the profuse sweating 
the patient should be nursed in blankets rather than sheets, 
and if the joint pains bo severe, immobilisation of the affected 
joints by sandbags and elevation of the bedclothes by a cradle 
are desirable. Local applications to the joints, such as methyl- 
salicylate liniment, may give some relief. Even when the 
heart is unaffected the patient should remain in bed for a 
minimum of six weeks, while in oases with obvious cardiac 
involvement as many months may be required. 

Salicylates are of the greatest value in reducing the tem- 
perature and abolishing the joint pains in rheumatic fever. 
They have, however, little effect in preventing cardiac involve- 
ment. The drug is best given as sodium salicylate (sod. salioyl. 



78 INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

gr. 30, sod. bicarb, gr. 50, syr. axirantii aq. ad. 5i). For 
adults, until the temperature falls, a dally total of 180 to 
210 gr. of salicylate should be given ; the amoimt may then 
be decreased gradually to 60 gr. daily by cutting down the 
frequency of doses. The bicarbonate prevents salicylate 
poisoning, the symptoms of which are tinnitus, vomiting, and 
sometimes delirium. 

The diet is not important, but during the initial period of 
pyrexia the patient will probably only be willing to take fluids. 
If the pain is severe enough to prevent sleep, Dover’s powder 
may be necessary. Within forty-eight hours of adequate 
treatment with salicylates there is always a marked improve- 
ment in the symptoms. In spite of this it is most important 
not to allow the patient to sit up in bed or otherwise exert 
himself too early. The pulse-rate is the most important guide 
as to when a sitting posture may be allowed. This must be 
strictly forbidden as long as there is any tachycardia. It is 
often difficult to decide at what stage the disea^ has become 
quiescent. The blood sedimentation rate is a most valuable 
guide. If it is high the condition is still active and further 
rest is indicated. 

Prognosis and Prophylaxis. — The immediate mortality of 
rheumatic fever is relatively low, but it levies a heavy toll in 
deaths from cardiac failure in later life. Unfortunately it is 
a disease which tends to recur, more especially if the heart has 
been attacked. With each recurrence the chances of severe 
and permanent cardiac damage become increased. In every 
case of rheumatic fever the problem therefore arises of how best 
to avoid recurrence. Return to crowded and insanitary sur- 
roundings should be prevented ; if possible the patients should 
live in the country, and all predisposing causes of further attacks 
such as overwork, cold, and chills must be avoided. Un- 
fortunately, at "any rate in hospital patients, this is an ideal 
imattainable in the present state of society and economics. 

Tonsillectomy is inadvisable unless there is gross sepsis ; 
in any case the operation should not be performed until 
convalescence is completed. 

ERYTHEMA NODOSUM 

This condition is not a manifestation of acute rheumatism. 
It occurs chiefly in children and young adults. Indurated red 
areas appear chiefly over the shins, rarely on the forearms. These 
are rais^ above the surface of the skin and are very tender. 
Usually circular or oval, they vary in size from a half to two 



INFLUENZA 


79 


inches in diameter. At first they are red, but later become 
purple. The degree of constitutional disturbance is very 
variable. Often there is little or none, but sometimes there 
may be fever and vague joint pains. Unlike acute rheumatism, 
erythema nodosum does not produce cardiac lesions. 

The aetiology of the condition is not definitely established, 
but it is probably a cutaneous response to bacterial allergens, 
which are usually either streptococcal or tuberculous. This 
is suggested by the fact that patients sufiering from erythema 
nodosum firequently show evidence of chronic infection, such 
as enlargement of the tracheo-bronchial glands, infected tonsils 
and chronic enlargement of the glands in the neck. Some 
cases give a positive Mantoux test and are probably tuberculous 
in origin ; others react to hsemolytic streptococcal endotoxin. 

There is no specific treatment, and with rest in bed and 
local applications of lead lotion the lesions usually clear up 
within a fortnight. In view of the possible tuberculous origin 
of the disease, the patient should be investigated from this 
point of view, including an X-ray of the chest. 

INFLUENZA 

Probably no diaignosis is made so frequently and often with 
so little justification as that of influenza. The layman, indeed, 
is very apt to term any severe nasal catarrh or i^ection of the 
upper respiratory tract an influenzal attack. How difierent 
such cases axe from the true epidemics of influenza is well 
illustrated by the devastating pandemic which occurred in 
1918 and 1919. Perhaps the most striking point about the 
disease is the way in which it occurs in widespread epidemics, 
independent apparently both of climate and nationality. In 
1918 the numbw of deaths from the disease must have far 
exceeded the total of those killed in the War. Similar 
pandemics occurred in 1889 and 1899. 

ZBtiology. — The brilliant work of Laidlaw and others has 
shown that influenza, at any rate in some epidemics, is due to 
infection by a virus. Pfeifler’s bacillus, formerly tfrought to 
be the causal organism, is now known to be a secondary invader, 
as also may be other oi^^anisms, such as streptococci or pneumo- 
cocci. The complications of influenza, such as pneumonia, 
are due not to the virus but to secondary invading organisms. 
The disease is extremely infectious, as the virus is widely 
scattered by the patient’s cough. An attack produces a 
relatively short period of immunity, and some jreople appear to 
be specially susceptible to infection. In pandemics the disease 



80 


iNFEcrrious diseases 


is usually more severe in young and healthy adults than in 
infants or the aged. 

Symptoms. — The onset is always sudden and the incubation 
period very short. Any attempt to describe the clinical features 
is necessarily diflScult owing to the wide variations which occur 
in the disease in different localities and at different times. 
The cases can, however, be divided roughly into the so-called 
simple influenza and those with pulmonary involvement. 
The former type is met with in periods between widespread 
epidemics, and also includes the great majority of the cases 
even in pandemic periods. The disease begins with severe 
headache, aching of the joints, and pyrexia : the fauces are 
red and injected, but without definite tonsillitis ; a hard, 
hacking cough due to tracheitis develops early, but usually 
there is Uttle sputum. After four or five days of irregular 
pyrexia, with considerable prostration, the symptoms disappear 
and a slow convalescence ensues. In some epidemics complica- 
tions such as acute otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis, and 
rarely meningitis are frequent. Severe post-influenzal mental 
depression is not uncommon. 

In some epidemics gastro-intestinal symptoms are prominent, 
and such cases are often described as gastric influenza. The 
temperature is rarely above 100® F. ; the tongue is furred and 
the patient suffers severely from nausea and vomiting. There 
is abdominal discomfort rather than pain, and the bowels are 
usually constipated. Probably the symptoms are duo to 
influenzal infection, but needless to say the diagnosis must 
be made with caution, especially in the absence of an epidemic. 

The pneumonic or septicacmic type of influenza presents a 
veiy striking picture. Often starting with symptoms similar 
to those of the simple form of the disease, it rapidly becomes 
apparent that the illness is of a grave type. The breathing is 
rapid and shallow though there is no obvious respiratory 
distress ; cough is frequent and troublesome ; the sputum 
becomes considerable and is frothy and blood streaked. But 
perhaps the most striking feature is the colour of the patient, 
which ranges from pink in the milder oases to a charaoteristio 
heliotrope, lilac or violet hue in those who are desperately ill. 
The pyrexia is not necessarily high ; in fact, in the more severe 
cases, the patient may die with a subnormal temperature. 
Although involvement of the lungs is the most obvious feature, 
streptococci can sometimes be cultivated from the blood, indi- 
cating the presence of a true septicsemia. These organisms, 
however, are probably secondary invaders. The kidneys are 
affected, as is shown by the presence of albumen and casts. 



GLANDULAR FEVER 


81 


The mind is clear and alert to within a few hours of death, 
though occasionally delirium and convulsions occur, which are 
not, however, necessarily indicative of a true meningitis. 

The phyaical signs in the chest are very variable, and are of 
little value in assessing the severity of the diseajse. Sometimes 
nothing is heard except a few scattered r&les and rhonchi ; 
sometimes there may be dullness and bronchial breathing 
over a considerable area of lung. Often the physical signs 
vary considerably from day to day. The pulse is usually 
relatively slow compared with the temperature and respira- 
tion rate. Pleural effusions, empyema, or rarely pulmonary 
abscess may be serious complications or sequelae. 

Prognosis. — In sporadic cases of influenza death hardly 
ever occurs. In epidemics the death-rate varies with the 
proportion of pneumonic cases. The most significant point in 
the prognosis is the colour of the patient ; those with the t3rpical 
heliotrope tint invariably die very rapidly. 

Diagnosis. — In the presence of an epidemic the diagnosis is 
easy. With sporadic cases the diagnosis should not be made 
imtil other pyrexial illnesses have been excluded. 

Treatment. — There is no specific treatment for influenza, 
but without doubt inunediate confinement to bed tends not 
only to shorten the course of the illness but diminishes the 
incidence of complications. It also helps to limit the spread of 
the disease. Symptomatic treatment with aspirin (10 gr.), 
Dover’s powder (10 gr.), and steam inhalations give relief. If 
cough is troublesome, a linctus containing equal parts of sjTup 
of codeine phosphate and syrup of Virginian prune is often 
effective in 2-drachm doses. 

The treatment of influenzal pneumonia does not differ 
essentially from that of other forms of pneumonia. In severe 
cases oxygen should be given by nasal tube or tent. Sulphona- 
mides are certainly of value if given early and in adequate 
doses (vide p. 10), They are of no value and should not be 
given in uncomplicated caaea of influenza. 

Convalescence is often slow even after mild attacks, and 
several days of rest should be insisted on before the patient 
returns to work. 


GLANDULAR FEVER 
(Infeciioua 

Though febrile illnesses associated with glandular enlarge- 
ment were described many years ago the conception of glandular 
fever as a definite disease entity has only l>eoome firmly 
6 



82 INFECrriOUS DISEASES 

established during recent years. Moreover with the advent of 
specific laboratory tests it is probable that the malady may 
prove to be much more common than was supposed. 

iEtiology. — ^Nothing is known of the nature of the disease 
though its infectious or contagious character is proved by its 
occurrence in epidemics, often institutional. Though originaUy 
thought to be primarily a disease of young children it is becoming 
increasingly clear that glandular fever is far from uncommon 
in adults. It may indeed account for many mild “ pyrexias 
of unknown origin.” 

Clinical Picture. — Glandular fever has been described as of 
three tyi)es: (1) glandular ; (2) angmose ; (3) febrile. Needless 
to say these tjrpes overlap and the terms are of little value 
save in emphasising the main presenting symptoms in each 
case. The glandular type is chiefly seen in children, while the 
anginose and febrile types are more common in adults. The 
onset may be abrupt or insidious. 

Lymphatic Olands , — ^The glands in the neck are most often 
involved, but those elsewhere may also be enlarged. They are 
usually though not necessarily tender, and movement of the 
neck is painful owing to the adenitis. The spleen may be 
slightly enlarged. 

Throat , — A slightly sore throat is common in all types, but in 
that described as anginose there is a membrane over the tonsils 
sometimes involving also the fauces which closely resembles 
diphtheria. The condition develops slowly as compared with 
diphtheria, and is usually preceded by a period of pyrexia. 

Bashes . — These occur particularly in the more prolonged 
febrile types in adults. The rash appears towards the end 
of the first week and may closely resemble that of typhoid, 
measles, or rubella. It involves chiefly the trunk and comes 
out in crops. It occurs only in a minority of cases. 

Pyrexia , — ^The duration of fever is very variable, but in 
adults it may last for several weeks and precedes glandular 
enlargement. In children there is often only a few days’ fever 
while the glands are enlarged. The temperature is often high — 
104® F. or more — in the anginose types. 

In addition to the features described above there may be 
epistaxis, vomiting, diarrhoea, jaundice, cough, and pain in 
the chest and rarely a meningitic reaction. 

Diagnosis. — ^The disease is so protean in its manifestations 
that except in epidemics the diagnosis can seldom l>e made with 
certainty except with the aid of the laboratory investigations. 

The Blood Picture. — ^After an initial increase in the neutro- 
phils for a few days an absolute mononucleosis develops, 



UNDULANT AND ABORTUS FEVER 83 

which has given the disease its alternative title of infectious 
mononucleosis. More rarely there may be an initial leucopenia. 
When the disease is fiiUy developed, the total white count is 
usually between 10,000 and 20,000 cells with 60 to 80 per 
cent, of mononuclear cells. These include a few small lympho- 
cytes but mostly they are large lymphocytes and often atypical 
lymphocytes, which may resemble those seen in lymphatic 
leuksemia. A relative lymphocytosis may persist for months 
after all symptoms have disappeared. Apart from the white 
cell count there are no abnormal features as regards the blood. 
The blood sedimentation rate is usually normal except in the 
anginose type and when high fever is present. 

Paul- Bunnell Test . — ^The blood of patients with glandular 
fever contains heterophil antibodies which produce agglutina- 
tion and haemolysis of sheep’s red cells. These antibodies are 
not present in normal human blood in a titre exceeding 1 in 8. 
In glandular fever the titre may rise to very high figures, but a 
titre of 1 in 64 is almost diagnostic. Occasionally the Paul- 
Bunnell test is not positive for seven to fourteen days after 
the onset of symptoms. Positive Wassermann and Kahn 
reactions have also been reported but these are transient. 

Differential Diagnosis. — Sporadic cases of the anginose 
type may be confused with diphtheria or Vincent’s angina, 
but the clinical features and the blood count should render 
confusion unlikely. The prolonged febrile types, especially 
if there is a typhoid type of rash, may lead to a suspicion of 
enteric fever. The patient, however, is not so obviously ill as 
might be expected with typhoid and the laboratory findings 
will usually differentiate the diseases. In the rare meningitic 
form of the disease tuberculous meningitis may be suspected. 
In leuksemia there are usually anaemia and haemorrhages, while 
the leucocji® count is likely to be higher than in glandular fever 
and with more definitely abnormal w'hite cells. In rubella the 
Paul-Bunnell is always negative as it also is in secondary syphilis. 

Prognosis and Treatment. — Complications such as suppura- 
tion of glands are extremely rare and complete recoveiy is 
almost invariable. Treatment is purely symptomatic. Sulphona- 
mides are of no value. 


UNDULANT AND ABORTUS FEVER 

Two closely allied organisms, BruceOa meliiensis and 
BruceUa abortus, cause in man a prolonged pyrexia with a 
tendency to remissions and relapses. B. md/Uensis is primarily 



84 INFECnOUS DISEASES 

an infection of goats, B, dborivs of cattle. Man is infected 
through drinking the milk. Although there are minor differ- 
ences in the clinical features of undulant fever (Malta fever) and 
abortus fever, there is suflScient similarity in the two infections, 
as seen in man, to warrant their being described together. 

Symptoms. — The onset is gradual with p3rrexia, sweating, 
and sometimes rigors. Although the fever may be high, the 
patient often feels relatively well, and sometimes may even 
remain ambulant for long periods. The pulse is relatively 
slow and the patient is clear and alert. Sometimes the spleen 
is just palpable. In imdulant fever joint pains and arthritis 
may occur, but this complication is rare in abortus fever. 
The symptoms may last for many months with exacerbations 
or remissions. 

Diagnosis. — ^The possibility of abortus fever must always 
be borne in mind in any case of prolonged pyrexia without 
an obvious cause. Suggestive clinical features are the very 
profuse sweating, relatively slow pulse, and the fact that the 
patient is not as ill as might be expected with the prolonged 
fever. In all cases of continued fever agglutination tests should 
be performed. The agglutination titre usually rises to 1 in 
1,000 or even higher. The organism can sometimes be obtained 
by blood culture. 

Prophylaxis and Treatment. — Efficient pasteurisation affords 
complete protection. As many apparently healthy cows may 
be carriers, raw milk is always potentially dangerous. 

The disease tends to spontaneous cure, though relapses may 
continue for many months. Rest in bed in the earliest stages 
probably cuts short the duration of the illness, but it is extremely 
doubtful whether sulphonamides or indeed any specific 
treatment is of value. 


SPIROCHiETOSIS ICTERO-HiEMORRHAGICA 

Spirochetosis ictero-hemorrhagica (Weil’s disease) is a febiile 
jaundice due to infection by a spirochete, the leptoapira iciera- 
haemorrhagica, which is excreted in the urine of rats. Pre- 
sumably the organism penetrates the sodden but intact human 
skin. The disease occurs m miners, workers in sewers, fish- 
cleaners, or wherever water is likely to be contaminated by the 
urine of rats. 

Symptoms. — ^The onset is invariably sudden with high 
temperature and often a rigor. Headache, vomiting, and 
severe muscular pains are the main features during this initial 



TETANUS 


85 


febrile stage, but there is often nothing specially characteristic 
until jaundice develops on the fifth or sixth day. During the 
pre-icteric stage the diagnosis may be suggested by the occupa- 
tion, labial herpes, often haemorrhagic, and conjunctivitis. 

The jaundice is deep and the patient appears orange- 
coloured. Bile is present in the urine, but the faeces are not 
necessarily clay-coloured. In severe cases there is great 
prostration and often a tendency to haemorrhage, producing 
epistaxis, petechiae, or even haematemesis or melaena. The urine 
contains albumen, casts, and blood. Usually after a week 
or two the jaundice gradually disappears and convalescence 
is established, but a proportion of the patients develop anuria 
and die from uraemia and exhaustion. The temperature falls 
within a few days of the development of jaundice, but there is 
sometimes a secondary rise of temperature about the third 
week of illness. Probably many mild cases occur in which 
jaundice is absent. Except in localised epidemics these are 
likely to be misdiagnosed as influenza. 

Diagnosis. — A definite diagnosis can be made by inoculation 
of the patient’s urine into a guinea-pig. The urine does not 
contain the leptospira until about the tenth day. Agglutina- 
tion tests are likely to be positive about the sixth day. Blood 
culture is negative except during the pre-icteric stage. 

A polymorphonuclear leucocytosis is found in spirochsetosis, 
in contrast to the normal or low white-cell count in toxic or 
infective jaundice. Spirochaetosis should be thought of as a 
possibility in aU cases where jaundice develops after some days 
of a severe febrile illness, especially if the patient’s occupation 
is one which involves getting wet in rat-infested surroundings. 

Treatment. — A specific anti-serum is available, which is of 
value, especially if given within the first week. Thirty to 
forty c.c. are given intramuscularly or intravenously. As 
hepatitis is present the patient should take large amounts of 
glucose and fluids, and fats should be avoided. Symptomatic 
treatment is required for the headache and other symptoms. 


TETANUS 

IBtiology. — The disease is due to infection by the Tetanus 
bacillus, which is usually present in cultivated ground, road 
dust, and horse manure. The bacillus is anaerobic, and forms 
spores which are extremely resistant to heating and drying. 
Infection occurs through contamination of wounds, though 
these may be so slight that they may escape detection. 



86 


INFECnOUS DISEASES 


Pathology. — ^The bacilli multiply at the site of inoculation 
with the production of a most virulent toxin. The latter has 
a special affinity for the central nervous system ; this it reaches 
by passing up the motor nerves, possibly through the axis 
cylinders or in the perineural l3irmphatios. Once the toxin 
reaches the central nervous system it appears to form some 
kind of combination with the nerve tissues and the s3miptoms 
of the disease become manifest. Owing to the anaerobic 
character of the bacillus it is more likely to flourish in deeply 
punctured wounds than in superficial abrasions. 

Tetanus bacilli in a virulent form may often be cultivated 
from the site of infection long after the disease has become 
established ; whether such a focus continues to manufacture 
toxin is not clearly established. It is possible that the tissues 
of the patient may have already acquired anti-tetanic powers 
sufficient to neutralise the formation of further toxin, though 
ineffective in dealing with that formed and conveyed to the 
nervous system diuing the earlier stages of the disease. 

At autopsy there may be hypostatic pneumonia and 
occasionally rupture of muscles, particularly the rectus 
abdominis, owing to the spasms. 

Symptoms. — The period which elapses between the infection 
and the development of symptoms varies from two to twenty 
days or even longer. The ^t sign of the disease is usually 
a stiffness or rigidity of the muscles of mastication or of the 
neck muscles, which is frequently first noticed when the patient 
awakes in the morning. The description of a patient with 
tetanus, written by Hilton Fagge in his textbook of medicine 
over fifty years ago, cannot be improved upon. After 
describing the inability to separate the t^th known as trismus, 
he continues : “ The toxic spasm increases and spreads to 
the muscles of the trunk, and to at least the upper parts of 
the limbs. The patient’s aspect is then very remarkable. The 
face may be described as having an unnaturally aged appearance, 
the forehead being wrinkled and the features contracted and 
drawn. The angles of the mouth are wide apart, and the lips 
are stretched over the closed teeth, so as to produce a fixed 
smile, which is known as the risus sardonicus, and is at once 
seen not to be indicative of any pleasurable feeling. The 
alse nasi are thrown outwards, and the nasolabial furrows 
are exaggerated. The eyelids are half closed, but the eyes are 
said to have a staring expression, although their muscles are 
seldom if ever affect^ by the cramp. The jaws may be so 
firmly clenched that not even a paper-knife can be wedged in 
between the teeth, or perhaps they can still be separated a 



TETANUS 


87 


little way from one another. The body is rigid, and it is 
almost curved, so that the back forms a deep hollow. This 
condition is called opiathoUmoa. At the same time the chest is, 
of course, thrown forwards, and it is more or less fixed in a 
state of expiration, while the abdomen is fiat or sunken. The 
tension of the affected muscles is obvious to the touch and sight ; 
this is particularly the case with the recti abdominis, which are 
often described as feeling ‘as hard as boards,’ and which in 
persons who are not too fat stand out in knotty masses through 
the integuments.” 

Pain is an early feature of the disease ; the breathing is 
embarrassed and the voice reduced to a whisper. From time 
to time refiex spasms with opiathotonoa occur, which are usually 
attended by a great increase of pain. These paroxysms may 
occiu spontaneously or be brought on by sbght external stimuli, 
such as a sudden noise or draught of cold air. The mind usually 
remains perfectly clear. Pyrexia is variable, but sometimes it 
may be very high. Death may occur early in the disease fix)m 
respiratory paralysis ; in the more protracted cases, even 
though the spasms may have ceased, the patient may die of 
exhaustion and heart failure. 

What is known as ‘‘ local tetanus ” is met with occasionally, 
especially in those who have received prophylactic serum ; 
in this, spasms affect only groups of muscles in the neighbour- 
hood of the site of infection. 

Symptoms of tetanus may develop when an old wound is 
reopened. Before any such operation a prophylactic dose of 
serum (3,000 units) should be given. 

Diagnosis. — Strychnine poisoning may simulate tetanus. 
In this the muscles of the hands are more often involved than 
in tetanus, and, also, the muscles do not remain rigid between 
the paroxysms. The trismus of tetanus must be distinguished 
from that due to local causes about the jaw, such as dental 
irritation. Occasionally the fear of ” lock-jaw ” may produce 
hy.sterical symptoms, which superficially may resemble tetanus. 

In meningitis, although opisthotonos and neck rigidity 
may be striking, absence of trismus usually makes the diagnosis 
apparent. Moreover, in tetanus the cerebrospinal fluid is 
clear unless serum has been given intrathecally. 

Prognodi. — The longer the interval between the occurrence 
of the wound and the first manifestations of the disease, the 
better the prognosis. Where this is less than eight days the 
outlook is bad. Even more important from the prognostic 
imint of view is the length of time that elapses between the 
first symptoms of triamua and the onset of reflex spasms. 



88 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


When this is less than forty-eight hours, recovery is im- 
probable. Unfortunately, even with new methods of treatment, 
there is little improvement in the prognosis of fully developed 
tetanus. 

Prophylaxis and Treatment — ^The value of anti-tetanic 
serum as a prophylactic measure is universally recognised. 
At least 3,000 units should be injected subcutaneously as 
early as possible after all wounds, particularly if these have 
occurred on a road or cultivated ground. Even a graze on 
the skin or small puncture wounds are potentially dangerous. 
Further injections should be given at weekly intervals until 
the wound is completely healed. Failure to give prophylactic 
serum can only be regarded as criminad negligence. 

Active immunisation with tetanus toxoid produces an 
immunity, the degree and duration of which is doubtful, and 
as a prophylactic measure it in no way supersedes the 
prophylactic serum. Two doses of 1 c.c. should be given 
subcutaneously at an interval of not less than six weeks. 

In the treatment of tetanus there are four essentials ; 
(1) an adequate amount of serum given at the earliest possible 
moment with a view to the neutralisation of further toxin 
formation ; (2) sedatives to diminish muscular rigidity and the 
severity of spasms ; (3) adequate nutrition ; (4) cleansing and 
drainage of the wound. 

Serum Treatment , — Although it is doubtful whether anti- 
tetanic serum has any appreciable effect in neutraUsing toxin 
which has already reached the nervous system, it is certainly 
able to neutralise any further toxin which may be formed in 
the focus of infection. The best method of giving serum is 
intravenously, and a large dose, certainly not less tlmn 100,000 
units and preferably 200,000 units, should be given at once. 
Wlien large doses of serum are given intravenously it has been 
shown that a considerable portion of the antitoxin remains 
in the blood for three weeks or longer and there is therefore no 
need to give subsequent doses. Serum should not be given 
intrathecally, as it frequently produces an aseptic meningitis 
with severe cerebral symptoms. Intramuscular injections may 
be used as an adjuvant to, but not as a substitute for, 
intravenous therapy. 

Sedatives , — When the spasms are frequent and severe the 
use of avertin has proved most valuable. It should be given 
rectally in fuU doses (0*1 gm. per kilo of bodyweight). Avertin 
usually abolishes spasms and rigidity, thereby preventing 
exhaustion and facilitating feeding. 

Feeding , — ^Death from exhaustion is less probable if the 



ANTHRAX 


89 


nutrition of the patient can be maintained. Spasms and 
rigidity involve the expenditure of much muscular energy, 
and an attempt must be made to give at least 2,000 
calories daily, mainly in the form of glucose, milk or eggs. 
If necessary a stomach or nasal tube may be used when 
the patient is under avertin. 

Treatment of the Wound . — The wound should not be dealt 
with until several hours after a large intravenous dose of 
antitoxin. Otherwise there is liable to be a flood of un- 
neutralised toxin into the circulation. If there is any pus it 
should be given free drainage, and small wounds or abrasions 
over which scabs have formed should be opened up and cleansed 
with hydrogen peroxide. 


ANTHRAX 

Anthrax is primarily a disease of herbivorous animals, but 
occasionally occurs in man. In England, the disease is mainly 
found among those who work with hides and animal hair, such 
as tanners and wool-sorters. Infected shaving-brushes have 
accounted for a number of cases. 

The anthrax bacillus is about the diameter of a red 
corpuscle in length, and in culture forms spores, which are 
extremely resistant to heat. Owing to its large size the 
bacillus is readily detected as a gram-positive rod in smears 
from lesions due to anthrax. 

The most common form of the disease is a local infection of 
the skin known as a malignant puetide^ occurring on exposed 
parts such as the face, neck, and arms, in those who handle 
infected material. The first symptom is itching, and in the 
course of a few days the lesion presents a characteristic appear- 
ance, In the centre there is a black slough or eschar due to 
effused blood ; surrounding this is a ring of minute vesicles, 
and the whole lesion is encircled by a markedly indurated area ; 
the neighbouring glands are swollen but do not suppurate. 
One of the most striking features is the absence of pain, as 
compared with a lesion of similar size due to pyogenic organisms. 
Often the patient feels quite fit for some days, but later fever 
Jind collapse indicate a septicceraia and the prognosis is extremely 
bad. 

Diagnosis of Anthrax . — ^This is readily made on bacterio- 
logical examination. The occupation of the patient and the 
absence of pain in the local lesion are extremely suggestive, 
even when the pustule is not oharaoteristic. 



90 mFEcnous diseases 

Treatment of Malignant Pustule . — ^Early diagnosis is essential. 
Solavo’s anti-anthrax serum should be given intravenously as 
early as possible in doses up to 100 o.o. Intramuscular injection 
of serum should be repeated in smaller doses. Intravenous 
arsphenamine (0-6 to 0*9 grm.) and sulphapyridine have both 
been reported as of great value. 

Pulmonary Form of ArUhrax . — ^This occurs as the result of 
inhalation of infected material and is known as wool-sorter’s 
disease. The symptoms are indefinite, and consist of a feeling 
of constriction in the chest, with cough and sputum. The 
diagnosis is made by the discovery of the anthrax bacillus in 
the sputum. Death is invariable. 


GLANDERS 

Glanders is a disease of horses, and is extremely rare in 
man. The causal organism is Pfeifferdla mallei. 

Human glanders occurs in two forms, acute and chronic. 
In aovUe glanders the onset is sudden, with fever, malaise, 
headache, vomiting, and pain in the joints. These general 
symptoms are rapidly followed by nodular subcutaneous 
enlargements, known as farcy buds, which quickly ulcerate ; 
the general picture is one of pyssmia. The disease in the 
acute form is invariably fatal. 

In chronic glanders localised nodular enlargements appear 
on the skin, which ulcerate to form chronic ulcers with indurated 
edges. The disease may persist in a chronic form for many 
years, but in some cases an exacerbation of symptoms occurs, 
resulting in death from acute glanders. In chronic glanders 
abscesses must be opened, and, when possible, the cutaneous 
lesions excised. 


ACTINOMYCOSIS 

Both local and general infections are sometimes produced 
in man by organisms of the fungus group, which are known 
as the mycoses. None is common except actinomycosis, 
which is caused by the Streptothrix actinomyces. 

This disease occurs frequently in cattle, and it was formerly 
maintained that the streptothrix gained access to man through 
small abrasions around the Ups or gums by direct inoculation 
from straws or grasses held in the mouth. More recently, 
however, the organism, which in man is anaerobic, has been 
shown to exist not uncommonly as a saproph)^ in the 
mouth, [particularly in carious teeth. 



ACTINOMYCOSIS 


91 


The organism, as seen in pus from an actinomycotic lesion, 
consists of a mass just visible to the naked eye as a small yellow 
granule, usually described as a “ sulphur granule,” the centre 
of which is formed by a mass of branching filaments with an 
outer layer of club-shaped bodies. The filaments are gram- 
positive, but the clubs can be demonstrated only with 
difficulty. 

The disease varies in its clinical manifestations according to 
the part of the body affected. 

1. The Jaw and Surrounding Structures . — ^This is by far the 
commonest site for infection in man, and probably accounts 
for well over half the cases encoimtered. The disease often 
starts with an injury such as an extraction of a tooth or a 
fracture of the jaw. In a fully developed case the affected 
area is indurated with numerous inflammatory nodules, some 
of which break down and form abscesses, discharging pus 
which may show typical sulphur granules. The disease tends 
to spread, often with marked cicatrisation of the older parts of 
the lesion, and may extend down into the neck or upwards 
over the maxilla. S^ondary infection with pyogenic organisms 
occurs frequently. 

2. Intestinal Type . — Infection takes place presumably as a 
result of swallowing the streptothrix, which tends to lodge 
most commonly in the appendix, caecum, or ascending colon. 
It may produce a close simulation of acute appendicitis, for 
which the appendix may be removed, and offiy recurrence 
of symptoms makes the diagnosis manifest. Sometimes the 
infection is more chronic and leads to the formation of a 
slowly growing mass in the right iliac fossa, which consists of 
adhesions and granulomatous material. Eventually the process 
involves the abdominal wall with the formation of fistulse, 
through which pus and sometimes faeces are discharged. In 
the intestinal type of case the infection may reach the liver, 
which becomes the seat of multiple abscesses with considerable 
fibrosis. This gives a roost striking appearance at autopsy, 
the liver resembling somewhat a sponge or honej'comb, the 
interstices of which are filled with pus. 

3. Lung . — The infection may sometimes reach the lungs by 
direct spread from the neck into the mediastinum, but most of 
the cases in which the lung is involved appear to l)e primary, 
as the result of inhalation of the organism. Clinically, the cases 
closely resemble ohronio pulmonary tuberculosis with cough, 
fever, and hnmoptysis. As in phthisis, there may be cavity 
formation, but, ui^ke phthisis, sinuses, usually multiple, form 
in the chest wall. 



92 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


In severe oases a condition of pyaemia may be established by 
invasion of the blood vessels ; metastatic abscesses containing 
the streptothrix form in any part of the body, such as the 
brain, muscles, or bones. 

Course and Prognosis. — The disease is extremely chronic 
and may last for many years. The pulmonary and intestinal 
types are usually fatal, but when infection is confined to the 
jaw and neck there is often complete recovery. Severe 
secondary infection is an unfavourable feature. 

Diagnosis. — In any condition around the jaw, in the chest 
or abdomen, which is associated with the formation of multiple 
and persistent sinuses, actinomycosis should be suspected. 
Sulphur granules in the pus are frequently not seen. 

Treatment. — Abscesses and infected areas should be emitted 
and drained. The only drug which appears to affect the 
disease is iodine, which may be given as potassiiun iodide in 
very large doses, up to 180 to 360 gr. a day, or as a 10 per cent, 
solution of iodine ; 4 to 30 minims are given thrice daily in 
milk. When the disease is localised in one area such as the 
jaw or the neck, deep X-ray therapy has produced great 
improvement. Good results have also been reported with 
sulphonamides. 


Rabe Mycotic Infections 

Sporotrichosis. — This is a condition caused by the fungus 
Sporotrichum producing small firm nodules on the skin, which 
eventually break down and form abscesses. The lesions closely 
resemble those of syphilis and tubercle. 

Aspergillosis. — Pulmonary infection due to the fungus known 
as Aspergillus fumigatus occurs rarely, and can only be diagnosed 
from tuberculous conditions by the discoveiy of the organism 
in the sputum. 


PSITTACOSIS 

In 1930 outbreaks in England and elsewhere brought this 
disease into prominence. The infection is primarily one of 
parrots, but it is highly infectious to man. It is doubtful 
wheiker a patient with the disease can infect other human 
beings. The causal organism is a filterable virus. 

After an incubation period of some ten da3rB the patient 
becomes acutely ill with high fever and severe hea^ohes. 



PSITTACOSIS 


93 


The condition soon comes to resemble that of the typhoid 
state. Pulmonary symptoms are often prominent, and signs 
of patchy consolidation may appear. Sometimes there is an 
eruption of rose spots rather resembling those of typhoid fever. 
After two to three weeks the temperature falls rather abruptly 
and convalescence is slow. 

The diagnosis rests on the history of contact with a sick 
parrot and the development of an illness resembling typhoid 
or an atypical pneumonia. Negative bacteriological findings 
as regards other diseases help to confirm the diagnosis. 

There is no specific treatment and the mortality is usuaUy 
about 20 per cent, but varies considerably in different outbreaks. 

J. J. CONYBEARE. 



TUBERCULOSIS 


PATHOLOGY 

T uberculosis has been recognised from early times. 
Villemin proved it to be a transmissible disease in 1865, 
and Robert Koch isolated the bacillus in 1882. 

The Tubercle Bacillus. — Tubercle bacilli belong to a class of 
organisms which stain with basic dyes and which do not easily 
lose their stain when treated with acids and alcohol — a property 
which permits this class to be distinguished frxim other organisms 
when films or slides containing infected material are stained 
by the Ziehl-Neelsen method. Several apparently stable types 
of tubercle bacilli have been isolated and classified according 
to their pathogenicity. Of these, only the human and bovine 
t^T^es are knovkTi to cause tuberculosis in man, although related 
acid-fast saprophytes occasionally appear in the sputum in 
cases of bronchiectiisis and may thus cause difficulty in diagnosis. 

The human tubercle bacillus is a slender rod, commonly 
slightly curved, and tends to occur in small groups in infected 
sputum. It is about 5 in length. Bovine tubercle bacilli 
are slightly shorter and thicker. Non acid-fast granules derived 
from tubercle bacilli exist, and may be demonstrated in sections 
of colonies of bacilli on artificial media, and also in healing 
lesions in human tissues. A controversy exists as to whether 
or not these granules are capable of giving rise to the organism 
again, and as to whether a life-cycle of different forms of the 
bacillus really occurs. The organism is exceptional in many 
respects ; thus, for example, its respiration is independent of 
changes in pH between the wide limits of 1*5 and 12. It is 
strictly aerobic, because it lacks the ability to induce glycolysis 
anaerobically. The respiration of cultures of the organism is 
proportional to the oxygen tension of the environment. This 
dependence of the organism upon oxygen is a fundamental 
factor in the pathology of the disease. 

Chemical analysis of tubercle bacilli has led to the isolation 
of constituent carbohydrates, lipoids, fats, and proteins. The 
lipoid fraction is of particular importance because it varies 

94 



PATHOLOGY 


95 


suffioiently in kind and in concentration in the different types 
of tubercle bacilli, and in related saphrophytic organisms, to 
permit identification by appropriate analysis ; and also because 
it shares with the protein component of the organism the ability, 
on injection, of producing the specific tissue reaction — ^that is, 
the formation of tubercles — ^in both normal and previously 
infected animals. 

Tissue Beactions. — Infection by tubercle bacilli may produce 
various infiammatory tissue reactions. Of these necrosis, 
exudation, and local cellular proliferation tend to take place 
early, though in any order or combination. They are in no way 
specific to the tissue in which they occur. Necrosis and the 
exudation of fluid, fibrin, leucocytes, and mononuclear cells 
are essentially similar processes in this, as in every inflammatory 
reaction. Local cellular proliferation includes the infiltration 
of the area concerned with macrophages and the formation of 
epithelioid cells, giant cells, and tubercles. In the lung the 
macrophages are t3Tpified by “ alveolar phagocytes ” whose 
origin is debated. The giant cells which have their nuclei 
arranged peripherally differ in this respect from those produced, 
for example, by the irritation of foreign bodies. Occasionally 
and characteristically these three reactions are together con- 
cerned in the formation of tubercles, which consist of epithelioid 
cells, lymphocytes, and reticulum, varying in quantity and 
arrangement but often concentrically placed about a core 
containing necrotic debris and one or more giant cells. Macro- 
scopic tubercles are made up of aggregations of manj" 
microscopic tubercles such as the above, and appear as greyish- 
white translucent small nodules. 

Subsequent tissue reactions consist of caseation, liquefaction, 
fibrosis, calcification, and occasionally ossification. Caseation 
is typical of tuberculous inflammation. It is preceded by fatty 
degeneration and necrosis of the tissue cells, and consists in the 
transformation of such tissue into a somewhat translucent 
uniform conglomerate. Since considerable areas of limg may be 
involved quite suddenly, and since the process occurs at a time 
usually relatively distant from the moment of infection, it has 
been assumed that a change in the allergy of the patient is an 
important causal factor. Liquefaction of a caseous area is 
accompanied by a rapid and considerable increase in the number 
of adjacent tuWcle bacilli, and also by an active local vascular 
hyperasmia. It seems possible that liquefaction, therefore, is a 
hypersensitive reaction to the presence of rapidly multiplying 
bacilli. Following the absorption of the liquid contents of such 
an area, or their excretion into the bronchial tree, if one or 



96 


TUBERCULOSIS 


more bronchi be eroded, a cavity results. Persistent ventilation 
of the walls of the cavity gives rise to the aerobic conditions 
favourable for the growth of tubercle bacilli, w'hile satellite 
foci may at any time develop if aspiration through the bronchi 
to adjacent and distant parts of the lungs occurs. 

Fibrosis, calcification, and ossification are tissue reactions 
associated with healing, though the nature of the stimuli which 
determine their occurrence is unknown. Though varying 
amounts of fibrous tissue reaction are to be found in most forms 
of tuberculosis in the lungs and elsewhere, a special example 
(fibroid phthisis) of the adult pulmonary type of the disease is 
noteworthy in that the indurative process is pronoimced from 
an early stage, and so continues, with proliferation of fibrous 
tissue around vessels and bronchi. More or less gross contraction 
of the lung involved occurs, together with atelectasis, secondary 
bronchiectatic changes, and compensatory emphysema. The 
pleura, too, is often grossly thickened in such cases, and the 
heart and trachea displaced. 

Calcification, which is dystrophic, occurs in necrotic and 
caseous foci, and is found most commonly in tuberculous 
glands, in primary complexes (Ghon’s foci), and in early 
haematogenous secondary lesions as they slowly heal. In these 
lesions, too, bone may develop, though usually only after 
many years. 

It must be emphasised that within calcified or ossified foci, 
or foci encapsulated with fibrous tissue, tubercle bacilli may 
remain ahve for many years, and that these heaUng reactions 
are essentially reversible processes. It is possible that an 
alteration in allergy may determine such a reversal, and that 
under these conditions the foci may again become active and 
form the starting point for progressive phthisis. 

Cases of the common adult form of pulmonary tuberculosis 
usually show fluctuations of activity of the disease in which 
these different tissue reactions variously dominate the picture 
from time to time. In perhaps a majority of such cases pro- 
ductive reactions — e,g., cell proliferation and fibrous tissue 
formation — predominate, but are occasionally but remorselessly 
interrupted by exudative advances, caseation, and liquefaction. 
The primary focus, and tuberculous lobar and broncho- 
pneumonia, are examples of lesions in which exudative changes 
are outstanding ; while miliary tuberculosis — the result of 
haematogenous dissemination of the disease, with its multiple 
discrete lesions, on the whole of uniform appearance — may 
show mainly exudative or mainly productive tissue reactions 
and so give rise to variations in the chronicity of the disease. 



PATHOLOGY 


97 


The commoner, less extensive multiple haematogenous lesions, 
which usually appear soon after primary infection and are 
distributed towards the apices of the lungs, as a rule are pro- 
ductive in character and tend to calcify (Simon’s foci). Isolated 
large haematogenous foci (Assmann’s foci) often become caseous, 
with a variable subsequent fate. 

Blood-vessels, veins, but less commonly arteries, are attacked 
by tuberculosis. The typical lesion is the intimal tubercle, 
which differs in no essential of structure from the tubercle 
described above. The breakdown of such a tubercle may lead 
to the discharge of tubercle bacilli into the blood-stream, and 
so to the production of isolated or multiple haematogenous 
lesions, or to generalised miliary tuberculosis. Tuberculosis of 
the wall of a vessel, especially if supporting structures have 
been lost as in a pulmonary cavity, may lead to aneurysm 
formation (Rasmussen’s aneurysm). Tuberculous endarteritis 
is occasionally encountered. Ljrmphatic vessels, apart from 
the important part they play in spreading primary infection 
from an involved organ to the regional lymphatic glands where 
caseation is common, and thence possibly to the entire lymphatic 
system of the body or the blood-stream, are themselves not 
infrequently involved. The reaction in rare instances seems 
mainly to be productive and caseation does not occur, the vessel 
and adducent glands becoming filled with proliferating cells 
of the endothelioid type, and lymphatic stasis results. When 
such a lesion becomes widespread throughout the lungs, the 
clinical and radiological appearances may resemble those of 
chronic (haematogenous) miliary tuberculosis. 

Bronchi and bronchioles are not infrequently eroded by 
adjacent tuberculous lesions and so become choked with cellular 
and necrotic debris. Furthermore, tuberculosis, directly or by 
the blood stream, may give rise to granulomatous bronchitis in 
which the lumen of the bronchus involved becomes progressively 
occluded by tuberculous granulation tissue and the stricture- 
producing consequences of fibrous tissue reaction. This process 
may extend to the trachea. Bronchial obstruction in this 
disease may also arise as a result of kinking deriving from the 
anatomical changes produced by, for example, pneumothorax, 
or even extensive disease ; as a result of viscid sputum or blood ; 
and especially in children, by the compression of bronchi by 
enlarg^ mediastinal glands. Since bronchial obstruction from 
all these causes is common, it follows that many different types 
of tuberculosis of the lungs are frequently and extensively 
complicated by pulmonary atelectasis, and ultimately by 
bronchiectasis. 



98 TUBERCULOSIS 

Tuberculosis of mucous surfaces throughout the body gives 
rise to the same tissue reactions. Granulation tissue, however, 
tends to be abundant, while caseation and liquefaction lead to 
ulcer formation. On serous surfaces, such as the pleura, the 
inflammation may remain dry and the fibrous tissue reaction 
result in adhesions. Commonly, however, there occurs an 
outpouring of clear effusion and cells in the exudative phase. 
In bone, suppuration is frequent, and may lead to the production 
of cold abscesses. 

Allergy and Immunity. — The tissue reactions to infection 
by tubercle bacilli are modified by the allergy and immxmity 
of the individual infected. Thus, at the site of reinfection the 
tissue reaction is intensified and accelerated, as compared with 
the tissue reaction around a primary infection. Moreover, this 
hypersensitive reaction in reinfected tissues is more rapidly 
followed by local disappearance of the bacilli and healing of the 
lesion. From this observation it was at first deduced that 
increased tissue activity was responsible for the production of 
antibodies, and that in fact immunity and allergy in tuber- 
culosis were mutually dependent phenomena. Since caseation 
and liquefaction were found to occur in association with 
relatively high degrees of allergy, and since both were harmful 
to the individual infected, an attitude of despair grew up in 
regard to immunological therapy — an attitude which was 
confirmed frequently by disastrous results in practice. Rich 
and his associates have, however, experimentally been successful 
in dissociating allergy and immunity, and have established the 
clinically important fact that it is quite possible to increase the 
latter without concurrently increasing the former. The use of 
tuberculin for this purpose is, however, still in the experimental 
stage. 

Certain races, as judged by their response to infection, would 
seem to be relatively immune to tuberculosis — for example, 
the Jews. Others — for example, the Irish, the Eskimo, and 
the Negro — have little racial immunity. A comparison of the 
subsequent morbidity from pulmonary tuberculosis of groups 
of uninfected and previously infected young adults exposed to 
the same risk of infection would suggest that tul^culous 
infection which has been overcome in the past confers some 
immunity on the individual. Furthermore, the immunity of 
the uninfected individual has been successfully increased in 
France (in children), and in Norway (in nurses), by the use of 
B.C.G. (vide p. 128). 

Tabercalin Beactioiis. — Tuberculin reactions have a limited 
diagnostic value in individual cases, and they may also be used, 



PATHOGENESIS OP TUBERCULOSIS 99 

for example, to survey the incidence of tuberculosis in a popula- 
tion. The reaction is specific, and indicates that aUergy to 
tuberculin has developed as a result of past or present 
infection. Though the intensity of the reaction is some measure 
of the degree of allergy, it is not necessarily indicative of the 
activity of the disease ; moreover, many acute infections such 
as pyelitis, or measles, or even tuberculosis itself (miliary 
tuberculosis or extensive phthisis) may diminish tuberculin 
sensitivity. Finally, after a tuberculous lesion has healed, 
allergy tends slowly to decrease if reinfection does not occur. 
The reaction can most conveniently be observed in the skin, 
and three tests — the von Pirquet (cutaneous), the Moro or 
patch test (percutaneous) and the Mantoux test (intra- 
cutaneous) — are available. The last is performed as follows : 
The skin on the flexor aspect of the forearm is cleaned with 
ether, and 0-1 c.c. of a 1 in 10,000 dilution of tuberculin 
(t.e., 0*01 mg. tuberculin) is injected intracutaneously. The 
skin is inspected from forty-eight to seventy-two hours later, 
and a disc of induration more than 8 mm. in diameter aroimd 
the site of injection is regarded as a positive reaction. If the 
reaction is negative or doubtful it may be repeated, using 
a 1 in 1000 (0*1 mg. tuberculin), or later a 1 in 100 (1 mg. 
tuberculin) dilution of tuberculin, until an undoubted positive 
reaction or the last dilution has been attained. Subject to the 
above-mentioned limitations a negative reaction is strong 
evidence that infection by tubercle bacilli has not occurred. 


Pathogenesis of Tuberculosis 

Bovine tubercle bacilli, ingested in infected milk, cause a 
significant but small proportion of all cases of human tubercu- 
losis. In this country, where bovine tuberculosis is relatively 
prevalent, l>etween 3,000 and 4,000 cases are found yearly, 
and the organism causes between 1,000 and 2,000 annual 
deaths. The patients are mostly young children and their 
illness is usually recngnised at or soon after primary infection, 
manifesting itself as glandular or meningitic tuberculosis. 
Less than 1 per cent, of cases of pulmonary tuberculosis arise 
from this source. Preventive measures, furthermore, may 
ultimately eliminate this type of the disease, for by 1938 
bovine tuberculosis was entirely eradicated in Norv ay, and it 
had become a great rarity in certain states in the U.S.A.— 
as a result of strict preventive measures. 

Patients with phthisis, who spray tubercle bacilli into the 



100 


TUBERCULOSIS 


air on coughing or talking, are the source of the gieat majority 
of cases of tuberculosis. Thus in Germany (where bovine 
tuberculosis is common) more than 90 per cent, of all primary 
infections occur in the lungs. Infected urine, faeces, or sinus 
discharges are by comparison of negligible importance. 

Tuberculous infection, sooner or later, develops in practi- 
cally every individual in European and U.S.A. communities ; 
indeed, the incidence of infection approaches 100 per cent, in 
aU classes at the age of forty, although below this age it is 
higher in every age group among the poorer than in the middle 
or upper classes. Primary tuberculous infection is now to a 
less extent predominantly associated with childhood than was 
the case at the beginning of this century, and many persons 
reach adolescence or yoimg adult life before becorhing infected. 

In the vast majority of individuals the infection is overcome, 
and the various types of progressive tuberculosis do not develop ; 
moreover, the mortality rates caused by the disease have in 
most civilised coimtries fallen very considerably in the last two 
generations. None the less, the ^sease continues to be one of 
the worst scourges of humanity. In England and Wales, for 
example, about a quarter of a million known cases of active 
tuberculosis were living, and 25,872 deaths occurred from all 
forms of tuberculosis in the year prior to mid- 1939, of which 
numbers more than four-fifths w'ere examples of respiratory 
tuberculosis. The war of 1914-18 was accompanied by a rise in 
the mortality from tuterculosis, and it is significant that to mid- 
1940 and mid-1941 the corresi>onding death rates were 27,372 
and 28,742 — increases respectivelyof 6 and 1 1 per cent, above the 
pre-war level. The mortality has since again decreased slightly. 

Our understanding of the factors which determine the 
development of progressive tuberculosis is incomplete. It is 
unknown, for example, if natural fluctuations in virulence of 
the organism occur. In animal experiments the severity of 
induced tuberculosis is, within wide limits, directly proportional 
to the size of the infecting dose. In man, however, Chauss^ 
and Lange have shown that the architecture of the bronchial 
and bronchiolar system is such that only particles of 10 fi or 
less in diameter can reach the alveoli where infection takes 
place. Such particles could only contain one or two tubercle 
bacilli. Since it is known that a tubercle bacillus can give rise 
to tuberculosis, and that the primary focus is single in almost 
every case, it would seem probable that for this, the common 
natural mode of infection in man, the size of the infecting dose 
is immaterial, though, of course, the likelihood of infection 
would probably depend on the frequency of exposure. 



PRIMARY TUBERCULOUS INFECTION 


101 


Whether reinfection occurs or not is uncertain. Thus, 
pathological evidence suggests that re-activation of previously 
quiescent foci would account for the bulk of adult tuberculosis. 
On the other hand, the high incidence of tuberculosis among 
doctors and nurses, and members of enclosed communities 
such as nuns or sailors, in all of which instances the chance of 
reinfection is high, would suggest that exogenous reinfection 
is common, and leads to progressive disease. 

The resistance of the individual to tuberculosis is probably 
modified by a variety of factors. Thus in primitive races the 
high early mortality of the disease may be due to the absence 
of an immunising childhood infection, or more probably to the 
absence of the factor of selection which has long operated in 
races exposed to tuberculous infection. It is noteworthy that 
adult piilmonary tuberculosis occurs more commonly in those 
whose height is relatively great as compared with their thoracic 
circumference. This form of tuberculosis is also linked fre- 
quently with diabetes mellitus, silicosis and schizophrenia ; it 
is relatively rare, however, for active pulmonary tuberculosis 
to be associated concurrently with any other infectious disease. 
The added burden, and possibly the biochemical changes, 
associated with pregnancy and its sequela^ not infrequently are 
accompanied by the development or the exacerbation of 
pulmonary tuberculosis. The long-recognised association of the 
disease with poverty, and the rise in the mortality which 
occurred in the last war and which is again taking place to-day 
would suggest that physical and psychological strain, poor 
living and working conditions, the increased employment of 
women, and inadequate diet are significant a^tiological factors. 
That the last is particularly imjortant would seem to follow 
from the fact that, after a temporary fall, an increase in the 
mortality of the disease coincide in Germany with the period 
of inflation in 1922 and 1923. The part played by such factors 
m leisure, fresh air, light and personal hygiene is difficult to 
estimate, since they are largely determined by the standard of 
life of the individual, which — ah we have sliowm — in turn 
brings into oi>eration other and pnffiably more im|>ortant 
consequences. 


Primary Tubkrctu.ous Infection 

The primary infection, as coinpi\i'ed with other tuberculous 
presents unique features. Thus the corresponding 
lymphatic gland and its adducent lymphatics are invariably 
and rapidly involved whatever the site of the lesion ; moreover, 



102 


TUBERCULOSIS 


this feature and the type of tissue reactions are independent 
of the age of the infected individual. In the lung the lesion 
takes the form of an area of bronchopneumonia, variable in 
size but usually small and subpleural in position. The local 
reaction is commonly exudative without typical tubercle 
formation — showing, however, a marked tendency to necrosis, 
caseation, and ultimately calcification. Bony tissue may 
develop in the focus after many years. The same sequence of 
reactions takes place in the regional lymph gland, and, since 
abundant interglandular lymphatics are present at the hilum 
of the lung, many of these gl€md8 and those adjacent to the 
trachea may be involved from a single pulmonary focus. The 
glandular component of the primary complex tends to be 
very large in children ; in adults the enlargement, though it 
occurs, is less marked. Exactly comparable changes occur 
when the bacilli first gain entry to the body via the intestine, 
or in the rare congenital cases via the liver. The intestinal 
focus as a rule heals completely and may leave no trace of its 
presence save the diseased glandular component of the complex. 
Primary foci in skin, tonsils, eye, or middle ear are exceptional. 
On rare occasions liquefaction of a primary focus in the limg 
takes place, and gives rise to a cavity, from which broncho- 
genous dissemination of tuberculosis may result. Less rarely 
ulceration of a bronchus by the glandular component of the 
complex may lead to this t 5 rpe of extension of the disease. 
Haematogenous dissemination, which tends to occur relatively 
early, is a fairly common consequence of primary infection, 
and here also the infected gland is probably more frequently 
the source than is the pulmonary focus. 

Probably the majority of aU primary infections cause so 
little constitutional or local disturbance that they pass entirely 
unnoticed. None the less pyrexia, which may be severe and of 
some days’ duration, may occur and may be accompanied by 
malaise, cough, and occasionally pleuritic pain. The illness is 
commonly diagnosed as influenza. Intestinal primary infection 
is also usually symptomless, 'though infrequently constitutional 
disturbance, pyrexia, constipation or diarrhoea, occasionally 
vomiting in children, and pain in the right lower quadrant of 
the abdomen may occur. In the chest physical signs are 
usually not abnormal, though rarely a transient pleural rub, 
or a few localised r&les, may be heard ; while in the abdomen 
local tenderness, muscle spasm, and palpable glandular enlarge* 
ment may be foimd. ftimary tuberculous infection is not 
infrequently followed by erythema nodosum. The interval 
varies firom four to eight weeks, and the skin lesion developing 



iat4‘<i 


Pl.VTK 1 

j*nt pnniar\ focus m the left u|)|mt lohe asNO< 
w ith hihir lyriif »ha< leiii 4 ]'>. 



1*1. ATK 1* 

A liealiim priinAry (f*hon\s) focus (»f i ulx^rcuUKHis ( a ) in the l<*ft Iuur 
with involvcmt*nt of the hilur utaini (ii). Both IcKions show early 

t iiU iticat ion. 


I To face page 10-. 



Pi.vTi: .*{ 

Kpit uJh'Ii >li(>u iiiiz a Iminoimiroii'. It \ iinolxin^’- t hr UL'^ltt 

iipfuT IciIk* (\j. and <iila» i^mn-nt of tlio ni<‘< Ija.sf irial liI.iikIv (ij). 
Atolta la*'!'' <if tlir ii|>|m*i an<l <<nn pon^-a t orv <-ni pli \ sciria of thi* 

flight atui louci pr(«-cnt. 



t 

Kpit tifa-rculoHiH. 7'ho hiiiiu* <aw four ntoitth,‘« l.itor. 'I'ho opjuat \ (a) 
in thf“ right iJj»j^K-r lofn* haw »l<‘<'r<-aMMl in si/< . arul th«* iiuaiiaHt inal 
glands ar<* muoh Hinallf^r. Soiiu* atolrotasm of t ho right ujijM-r loin* 

is still «-rit 


PRIMARY TUBERCULOUS INFECTION 103 

as allergy to the primary infection becomes demonstrable by 
tuberculin reactions. 

The proportion of primary pulmonary tuberculous foci 
which are demonstrable radiologically is unknown. Un- 
doubtedly the commonest radiological abnormality associated 
with the lesion is enlargement of the mediastinal glands, though 
considerable radiological experience is needed to dissociate 
pathological hilar glandular enlargement from the normal 
variations of blood-vessel shadows ordinarily aggregated in 
this region. The appearance with time of calcification in these 
glands will confirm the diagnosis. The pulmonary component 
of the primary complex when visible commonly takes the form 
of an isolated, often roimded, homogeneous shadow {vide 
Plates 1 and 2). Quite frequently, too, the focus is seen to 
consist of a group of small fiecks. The size of such foci, when 
uncomplicated, varies considerably but rarely exceeds an inch 
in diameter. Simultaneous hilar adenitis can usually be 
demonstrated. It is noteworthy that radiologically primary 
lesions are seen most often in the right lower and middle lung 
fields. As a rule the peripheral focus slowly calcifies, though 
occasionally — and then usually shortly after its appearance — 
it may excavate and leave a thin-walled cavity. In such cases 
tubercle bacilli may sometimes be demonstrable in the sputum 
or gaistric residue ; frequently, however, these investigations 
are negative. 

Epituberculosis. — Commonly associated with the develop- 
ment of the primary complex in the lungs of infants and children 
is the complication which has been called Epituberculosis. 
Various hypotheses as to its pathological basis exist. Thus, 
Rossle suggested that the lesion was constituted of the primary 
complex together with pulmonary atelectasis secondary to 
bronchial obstruction by enlarged caseous glands. On histo- 
logical grounds the appearances have been described as a non- 
caseating tuberculous pneumonia ; and also as an aUergic 
tissue reaction dependent upon the aspiration of dead tubercle 
bacilli, or the diffusion of tuberculo-toxins following the erosion 
of a bronchus by the primary focus. On clinical and radio- 
logical grounds atelectasis would seem to be a probable com- 
ponent of the lesion. In a series of cases of epituberculosis, in 
which bronchoscopy and measurement of the intrapleural 
pressure on the affected side were undertaken, the author found 
that bronchial occlusion by oompression or, less commonly, by 
caseous debris could frequently be seen, while the intrapleural 
pressure was in every case imduly negative — a finding 
characteristic of atelectasis. Whichever of these hypotheses 



104 . TUBERCULOSIS 

is correct, it is certain that the patient is allergic to tubercubn 
and presumably has some immunity, for the skin reactions 
are positive, and the infection is almost invariably overcome. 
Not infrequently tubercle bacilli can be demonstrated in the 
sputum or gastric residue, directly or after culture. 

The symptomatology, like that of primary infection, may 
be inconspicuous, though more often malaise, cough, pleuritic 
pain and irregular pyrexia of some duration are noticeable. 
Abnormal signs may be absent, though when extensive areas of 
limg are involved impairment of movement, percussion note, 
and air entry may be found, together usually with some 
mediastinal displacement toward the affected side and sometimes 
bronchial breathing and rfi.les over the area concerned. The 
radiological appearances {vide Plates 3 and 4) consist of a diffuse 
and homogeneous opacity extending out toward the periphery 
of the lung from the hilum, and it is sometimes possible to 
distinguish within this area the darker opacity of the peripheral 
caseous lung focus. The lesion is very frequently boimded by 
an interlobar fissure on one side, commonly that between the 
upper and middle lobes on the right. Mediastinal displacement 
toward the lesion and compensatory emphysema are frequently 
apparent, as are enlarged hilar glands. With healing the opacity 
shrinks toward the hilum ; the focus is exposed and may by 
now be showing calcification, as may the Mlar glands ; while 
ultimately complete return to normality, a calcified complex, 
or a residual fibrosis with localised bronchiectasis may result. 
It is probable that a considerable proportion of cases of 
bronchiectasis — especially apical bronchiectasis — originate in 
this way. 

Treatment of Primary Tuberculous Infection. — The increased 
examination of contacts to cases of adult type pulmonary 
tuberculosis, and the development of fluorographic surveys 
of large sections of the population, has recently revealed, and 
will continue to reveal, a considerable number of cases of 
primary tuberculosis in the active stage. In the past the bulk 
of these cases have been untreated, and the vast majority have 
satisfactorily overcome the infection, so that it would seem 
probably to be unsound to advocate institutional treatment for 
more than a selected proportion. Certainly, where home 
conditions are satisfactory, and when continued medical 
(including radiological) examination is available, there is much 
to recommend treatment in the home. Close observation is 
particularly important during the first twelve months after 
primary infection, since during this period the majority of 
disseminated tuberculous lesions, including bone and joint 





Pl.ATB 

A '‘fcondar\' (Aasmann’s) focus of t ii l>erc»i)osiM 
(a) in the left ‘'ubclavicular re^rion. 



Pr.ATK fJ 

Heah^d aiid falrified lixf^niuto^'erioiis M«*cf»nclurv 
(SiinoirH fo<'i). In thin t-afu; tfM*y aro unuMuall v' nu 
but nbow pr<*clr»nriinarii apical Ick a li.siif iori. 


[To face page 


PRIMARY TUBERCULOUS INFECTION 106 

tuberculosis and meningitis, occur. Therapeutic research in 
primary tuberculosis is needed, but at present, apart from 
observation, the most valuable measures would seem to be 
regulated periods of rest, fresh air, protection from added 
infection, and an abundant mixed diet of high vitamin content. 
Cases of massive primary infection, epituberculosis, primary 
infection in young adults, and the rare instances of multiple 
primary lesions are perhaps best treated in institutions, and 
sanatoria are most suitable for the majority. In those cases 
of epituberculosis in which the intrapleural pressure is shown 
to be unduly negative, it may be desirable to institute and 
maintain a temporary artificial pneumothorax in an attempt 
to prevent the development of bronchiectasis. 

Disseminated Tuberculosis. — Two important processes of 
widespread dissemination of tuberculosis throughout the body 
exist : for the bacilli may be carried in the blood-stream, or 
via lymphatics. Both methods may, of course, be combined ; 
thus, not only may lymphatic glands be infected from their 
own blood supply, but in the lymph the organisms may pass 
along the thoracic duct, and so into the subclavian vein. 

Wilson estimated that tubercle bacilli could be cultivated 
from the blood in 6 per cent, of cases of advanced pulmonary 
tuberculosis ; in about 2 per cent, of cases of non-pulmonary 
tuberculosis ; and in about 36 per cent, of cases of miliary 
tuberculosis. Histological evidence suggests that the source 
of the bacillaemia is usually an incompletely healed or reacti- 
vated component of the primary complex — most commonly a 
caseous or liquefied mediastinal lymph gland — within or 
adjacent to which an intimal tubercle on a vein breaks down. 
Direct arterial invasion is rare. As a consequence liberated 
bacilli as a rule are carried back to the lungs and there may be 
destroyed or give rise to secondary foci. An apparently 
quiescent primary complex may be reactivated and give 
rise to disseminated lesions after many years ; occasionally, 
too, intermittent hfiematogenous dissemination takes place. 
Multiple hsematogonous lesions from this cause more frequently 
occur in the first few months after primary infection. Indi- 
vidually somewhat rounded and small, they tend to be scattered 
symmetrically ; they usually heal leaving a few fibroid or 
calcified scars (Simon's foci) ; and they are most often found 
toward the apices of both lungs. Isolated large hsematogenous 
foci (Assmann's foci) (Plates 5 and 6) are less common ; are 
often situated in the subclavicular regions of the upper lobes ; 
and are less benign, since they usually cases te and not in- 
frequently liquefy and cavitate. Though both these types of 



106 TUBERCULOSIS 

hsematogenous ptilmonary secondary lesions may give rise to 
progressive phtUsis, they do not themselves as a rule produce 
symptoms or signs. Occasionally, however, cough productive 
of sputum which may contain tubercle bacilli, sometimes 
haemoptysis, and pyrexia with other symptoms of constitu- 
tional disturbance may occur. On the rare occasions when 
signs are detectable, they are limited to localised adventitious 
soxmds. Further evidence of activity in the lesions may be 
obtained from observation of the sedimentation rate, or the 
von Bonsdorff count. Cases such as these in which evidence 
of activity is found need therapy based upon those principles 
which govern the management of phthisis (vide p. 124). 

If tubercle bacilli are liberated into a pulmonary vein, or if, 
following systemic venous dissemination, organisms pass 
through the capillary circulation of the limg, they will be 
scattered, depending on their number, more or less widespread 
throughout the body. Isolated or multiple foci may therefore 
develop if the local and general immunity is insufficient to 
overcome the infection. Certain sites seem more favourable 
for the development of progressive systemic tuberculosis than 
others. Thus, for example, the meninges and the central 
nervous system, the eye, bones, joints, the suprarenal and 
kidney, the epididymis and fallopian tube, and the intestines, 
fairly frequently become diseased ; while muscles, fascia, 
and tendons are rarely if ever involved. Within the organs 
concerned, the same series of tissue reactions which has been 
described takes place, and their ultimate fate is bound up with 
the existing and resulting allergic and immunological responses 
of the individual. Every gradation from the most acute to the 
relatively chronic and ultimately healed lesions is seen. 
Reference should be made to the appropriate sections for further 
consideration of the various disorders which may result. 


MILIARY TUBERCULOSIS 

The hsematogenous dissemination of a single fine suspension 
of tubercle bacilli may give rise to acute generalised miliary 
tuberculosis. Quite fioquently, and when the focus of dis- 
semination is situated in a systemic vein, the majority if not 
all of the lesions are situated within the lung ; often the lungs 
and other organs share the infection ; and rarely, and 
presumably when a pulmonary vein is originally the site 
whence the organisms are set free, the lungs may be spared 
though other organs are heavily involved. 



MILIARY TUBERCULOSIS 


107 


The disorder occurs most frequently in children under ten, 
and it is uncommon above the age of thirty. Quite often a 
history of close contact with an open case of phthisis can be 
obtained. When miliary tuberculosis occurs in adults it is 
not infrequently associated with pre-existing tuberculosis of 
other organs, and only occasionally with chronic pulmonary 
tuberculosis. As a rule, however, the dissemination occurs 
during the first six months after primary infection. In acute 
cases the individual lesions — macroscopic tubercles — ^are pre- 
dominantly exudative in type, and since the consequences 
of meningeal involvement are disastrous, meningitic symptoms 
often tend to overshadow those due to miliary tuberculosis 
elsewhere. It is worthy of note that, in regard to tuber- 
culous meningitis, a curious localisation of the lesion tends 
to be present at the base of the brain, particularly in the 
neighbourhood of the interpeduncular space and about the optic 
chiasma. Here, beneath the thickened pia-arachnoid, a small 
amount of turbid exudate, which often contains tubercle baciUi, 
is to be found. On the membranes and along the arteries on 
the surface of the brain and within its folds, it is often possible 
to demonstrate minute grey tubercles. Some degree of hydro- 
cephalus, with flattening of the convolutions from pressure, is 
usually demonstrable. The cerebrospinal fluid, which on 
lumbar puncture is comparatively clear as a rule, but under 
an increased pressure, tf aUowed to stand will produce a 
coagulum in which tubercle bacilli may be demonstrated. 
Before coagulation an increase of cells up to several hundred 
per cubic millimetre can be shown. Of these, as a rule, 70 to 
80 per cent, are lymphocytes, though in the early stages higher 
proportions of pol 3 anorphs may be found. The protein content 
is increased from the normal of 30 mg. per 100 c.c. upwards 
to 300 mg. per 100 c.c. Glucose is diminished or absent, 
and the chlorides will be found to be below the normal level of 
700 mg. per 100 c.c. 

Symptoms and Signs. — Three classical types of miliary 
tuberculosis are described : the typhoid, the pulmonary, and 
the meningeal. As a rule, however, individual cases rarely 
conform strictly to any one type but present features of all 
three, with one dominant pattern. The onset is somewhat 
insidious, and a vague history of general impairment of health 
and appetite of some weeks or even months duration may be 
obtainable. The early symptoms are most commonly headache, 
vomiting, constipation, and a variable degree of pyrexia. Thus 
in children a gastro-intestinal upset Is usually suspected while 
in adults influenza is commonly diagnosed. The persistence 



108 


TUBERCULOSIS 


of the symptoms, however, and the continuation of the fever, 
rapid deterioration in the patient’s condition, with loss of 
weight, and then the onset of undoubted meningitis, as a rule 
serve to show the grave reahty. As there is great variabihty 
in the clinical picture, outstanding symptoms and signs are 
perhaps best dealt with individually : — 

1. Pyrexia , — Pyrexia is typically irregular, both in degree 
and duration. Usually wide variation between morning and 
evening temperature is shown, and not infrequently “ typus 
inversus ” is seen — that is to say, a pyrexia in which the 
morning temperature on some days is higher than that of the 
evening. Hyperpyrexia occurs, most commonly shortly before 
death. Occasionally from the onset the temperature rises 
slowly in a “ step ladder ” manner as in typhoid fever. 

2. Oastro-intestinal Features , — Constipation and vomiting 
are common. The latter often occurs immediately after any 
food and is extremely intractable. Acetone can therefore 
frequently be smelt in the breath of these patients. Distension 
of the abdomen, in spite of constipation, does not occur ; 
indeed, as the disease advances, its surface usually becomes 
scaphoid. The tongue and mouth become dry, and sordes 
appear around the teeth and on the hps. Diarrhoea is rarely 
a feature. The spleen is usually enlarged, but only occasionally 
to an appreciable degree in acute forms of mihary tuberculosis. 

3. Respiratory Features , — Dyspnoea and cyanosis, dis- 
proportionately severe as compared with physical signs in the 
chest, are often found. The patient frequently has a cough 
which may be productive of small amounts of sputum, which, 
unless phthisis is present, only rarely contains tubercle bacilli. 
Scatter^ rhonchi and fine rales may be heard over the lungs. 
In addition, there may be evidence of chronic pulmonary 
tuberculosis. 

4. C.N.S, Features , — Headache occurs early and is a 
dominant symptom, even before any other evidence of meningeal 
involvement is found. It is aggravated by movement, and 
appears to be of great intensity. The patient may cry out at 
intervals, even when semi -comatose. Another distressing 
feature of the disease is the grinding of the teeth. During the 
early stages irritative meningeal symptoms and signs are usually 
present. Thus, the patient is restless, complains of photophobia, 
and if left alone tends to he curled up on his side. The degree 
of neck retraction is usually less in tuberculous meningitis 
than in that due to other organisms. Neck rigidity, however, 
is commonly quite definite, and Kemig’s sign is present. 
Hypertonus in the limbs, with increased ^ee and ankle jerks 



MILIARY TUBERCULOSIS 109 

and extensor plantar responses, may be obtained. Later in 
the disease tendon reflexes are commonly diminished or lost, 
and may be absent from an early stage. Rarely examination 
of the fundi may reveal choroidal tubercles, while late in the 
disease papiUcedema is frequently foimd. Cranial nerve 
paralyses are common, and the third nerve (squint, ptosis, 
and dilatation of the pupil) is often involved. In children 
generalised convulsions occur, and in older patients tremor 
and muscle spasm take place. Terminally flaccid paralysis 
and coma supervene. 

5. Cardio-vdscvlar Features . — ^Tachycardia from an early 
stage is typical, while vasomotor instability is shown by the 
fact that a light scratch upon the skin produces marked local 
erythema and a wheal {tache cerebrate). 

Differential Diagnosis. — In the forms of miliary tuberculosis 
with prolonged pyrexia and no definite evidence of meningitis, 
the enteric group of fevers may be suspected. Apart from 
bacteriological and serological tests, however, t}q)hoid fever 
commonly is accompanied by a relatively slow pulse, a fairly 
characteristic rash, an absence of vomiting, and a tendency 
of the headache to disappear after the first week. Moreover, 
in typhoid there is a definite leucopenia, while in miliary 
tuberculosis a slight leucocytosis is common. The onset of 
meningeal symptoms is suggestive, and the identification of 
choroidal tubercles conclusive proof of miliary tuberculosis. 
Radiological examination of the chest in an established case, 
furthermore, will reveal miliary foci in the limgs. In the 
meningeal forms there may be difficulty in the diagnosis from 
meningitis due to other organisms, or from a cerebral abscess 
or tumour. The posterior basic meningitis of infants is most 
common before the age of one, and during this period of life 
miliary tuberculosis is uncommon. Careful examination of the 
cerebrospinal fluid is diagnostic, in that the organism con- 
cerned can usually be identified with certainty. Moreover, 
in tuberculous meningitis the increase in cells is commonly 
mainly lymphocytic, while in pyogenic meningitis the cxjUs 
are mainly polymorphs. Sometimes encephalitis lethargies or 
finterior polio-myelitis may be suspected, but in both these 
conditions the increase in cells in the cerebrospinal fluid is 
commonly less marked than in tuberculous meningitis, and 
the subsequent course entirely different. Careful examination 
of the tympanic membranes is essential, since the early stages 
of sinus thrombosis or meningitis arising from middle-ear 
disease may give symptoms somewhat similar to miliary 
tuberculosis. It is worthy of note that the tuberculin skin 



110 


TUBERCULOSIS 


reactions are of little or no help in diagnosis, since they are 
commonly negative in miliary tuberculosis. 

Prognosis. — In almost every case the disease is fatal, and 
the duration of life from the onset of the symptoms varies 
from a few days to a few months. Very occasionally cases 
which nm a subacute or chronic course are encotmtered, and 
isolated instances of recovery from miliary tuberculosis are 
on record. 

Treatment. — Palliative therapy consists in the relief of 
headache by froquent lumbar punctures ; the exhibition of 
sedatives, including morphia ; and the employment of such 
comforts as a darkened room, an absence of noise and of 
disturbance of the patient, are all important. Persistent 
vomiting may make nasal feeding necessary. No measure 
is known to make any major difference to the progress of 
the disease. 

Chronic Miliary Tuberculosis. — Hoyle and Vaisey have 
recently described a group of cases in which evidence of miliary 
tuberculosis was obtained and in which the patients lived for 
more than six months. Occasional cases apparently healed 
their lesions and recovered. The outstanding features of the 
disease were the following : Prolonged irregular toxaemia with 
recurrent phases of pyrexia associated with sweating, anorexia, 
loss of weight, amenorrhoea, cough, and sometimes pleuritic 
pain. Splenomegaly, generalised enlargement of lymph glands, 
tuberculides of the skin, iridocyclitis, cystic changes in the 
small bones of the hands and toes, and occasionally uveo- 
parotitis, are all variously foimd. The radiological appearances 
within the chest may show a distribution of foci similar to that 
in the common acute form of the disease. Not infroquently, 
however, the appearances suggest gross mediastinal lympha- 
denitis, together with a reticular shadowing spreading out 
throughout both lungs. When death occurred in these cases, 
it commonly did so after many months of toxaemia, and post- 
mortem findings were those of generalised disseminated tuber- 
culosis. It is very often extremely difficult to demonstrate 
tubercle bacilli in these cases, and so in Ufe the diagnosis 
often remains a matter of some doubt. Moreover, conditions 
such as sarcoidosis, miliary leukaemic deposits, and silicosis 
may on occasion give somewhat similar clinical or radiological 
features. 

Therapy is palliative and symptomatic, but should be 
associated in every case with prolonged rest, abundant good 
food, and, if recovery seems possible, a sanatorium regime at 
a later stage. 



GLANDULAR TUBERCULOSIS 


111 


Lymphogenous Disseminated Tuberculosis 
(Glandular Tuberctdosis) 

The structure of the lymphatic system with its intercalated 
lymph glands and numerous interglandular lymph vessels, 
the low pressure obtaining within these vessels, and the tem- 
porary fluctuations in the direction of flow of lymph make 
possible a relatively slow dissemination of tuberciilosis widely 
throughout the body. 

Primary tuberculous infection with consecutive involvement 
of the regional lymph gland commonly in turn leads to more 
or less extensive infection of neighbouring lymphatics and the 
glands into which they drain. Temporary or permanent arrest 
of the process may take place at this point, and the tissue 
reactions associated with healing occur. Sometimes, however, 
dissemination continues until virtually generalised lymphatic 
glandular tuberculosis results. Not infrequently reactivation 
of glandular disease after a variable period of arrest is foUowed 
by further extension. Since the general direction of lymph 
flow is centripetally toward the thorax, the spread of the disease 
from peripheral primary foci in, for example, the intestines or 
tonsil tends to be in that direction. Secondary haematogenous 
lesions in viscera and the adult type of pulmonary tuberculosis 
seem rarely if ever of themselves to give rise to lymphatic 
glandidar tuberculosis, though direct haematogenous spread to 
lymph glands undoubtedly occurs. On the other hand, haemato- 
genous spread from an infected gland is a persistent possibility. 
Apart from this risk, the disease is relatively benign, and it is 
possible that considerable immunity to tuberculosis later in 
life may thereby be developed. In England children between 
the ages of four and twelve are predominantly affected, though 
the disease is by no means rare in adolescence and young adult 
life. A high proportion of cases, when mesenteric or cervical 
glands are outstandingly involved, are due to bovine tubercle 
bacilli. The relative preponderance of cases in which cervical 
glands seem exclusively concerned is more apparent than real, 
and is due to their superficial situation, for in fact the mediastinal 
glands are by far the most commonly infected group. 

The appearance of the child with active glandular tuber- 
culosis often suggests the “ tuberculous diathesis,” with its 
clear beautiful complexion, marked hirsuties, and long eyelashes. 
Sometimes in children, and commonly in young adults, extensive 
glandular tuberculosis is associated with cutaneous stria) and 
occasionally petechice. 



112 


TUBERCULOSIS 


Recurrent pyrexia, sweating, loss of weight or failure to 
gain weight, malaise, and lassitude may occur independently 
of the site of the glands involved. The clinical features other- 
wise depend on the localisation of the adenitis. Thus in the 
neck superficial enlargement may be visible and palpable. 
Such glands are commonly matted together and to surrouuding 
structures, including the skin. The latter may be eroded and 
a discharging sinus form, which takes a long time to heal and 
may cause extensive scarring. Pain and tenderness are usually 
inconspicuous, until secondary infection takes place. When 
caseous, the glands are hard to palpation ; with liquefaction 
which may itself be associated with secondary infection from 
tonsils or teeth, the mass may feel cystic. 

Mesenteric tuberculous adenitis is commonly symptomless, 
but if extensive may give rise to progressive debility, asthenia, 
stunting of growth, pain, anaemia, and persistent diarrhoea 
with fatty or watery stools. The abdomen may be distended, 
and associated tuberculous peritonitis is not uncommon. The 
mass of glands may be palpable, while with healing intestinal 
obstruction may occur. 

Local symptoms associated with mediastinal lymphadenitis 
are cough, and occasionally pressure symptoms on mediastinal 
structures such as veins or bronchi. Bronchial obstruction 
from this source causes pulmonary atelectasis and leads 
ultimately to bronchiectasis in a considerable number of cases. 
Liquefaction within these glands leads to the formation of a 
mediastinal abscess in rare instances. 

The physical signs of enlarged mediastinal glands described 
by d'Espine and Eustace Smith are inconstant, and diagnosis 
is largely dependent upon symptomatology and X-ray 
examination. 

Tuberculous Ijonphadenitis must be distinguished from 
Hodgkin’s disease, the leukaemias, lymphosarcoma, neoplastic 
disease, sarcoidosis, and syphilis. L^ commonly clironic 
pyogenic adenitis, glandular fever, coeliac disease, and sprue 
may resemble the condition. The age, history, and appearance 
of the patient ; the local characteristics of the glands, if these 
are accessible, or their radiological appearances if within the 
thorax ; the state of the blood and spleen ; the presence of 
foci of infection ; the Mantoux reaction ; and, if possible, 
histological examination of an excised gland, will usually permit 
diagnosis. 

Treatment for the most part consists of rest, good surround- 
ings with fresh air, and good food. Graduate exposure to 
su^ght or ultra-violet light, cod or halibut liver oil, and, if 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 


113 


necessary, extra vitamins B and C, and iron or liver extract 
depending on the type of anaemia present, are often of value. 
Cervical glands are sometimes best treated by X-ray therapy, 
especially at an early stage, while their surgical removal is 
al^ often successful and may prevent the formation of an 
imsightly sinus. 


PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS {Adult Type) 

Pathogenesis. — Ranke’s theory of the three immunological 
stages of tuberculosis, and the work of Redeker in the Ruhr 
in 1921-28, led in Germany to the elaboration of a complex 
hypothesis as to the development of phthisis which has gained 
acceptance in most European countries and in the U.S.A. 
In broad outline, on this view phthisis rarely if ever develops 
directly from primary infection, but begins characteristically 
\dth a new infiltration in a previously infected and usually 
adult individual, probably often by haematogenous spread 
from a mediastinal gland, though also possibly by exogenous 
reinfection. This new lesion, it is thought, only progresses if 
a state of hypersensitiveness to tuberculin overshadows the 
immunity of the individual. Alternation in the dominance of 
allergy and immunity thereafter determine the fate of the lesion. 

It is generally agreed that the common earliest recognisable 
pulmonary lesion from which phthisis develops is an isolated 
focus which appears abruptly, often in the upper and posterior 
part of the lung. The lesion may progress rapidly in size, 
and similarly may cavitate at an early stage and thus give 
rise to further lesions by bronchogenous extension of the 
infection. Less frequently, however, phthisis has been shown 
to develop from reactivated primary or secondary lesions ; 
while occasionally subacute or chronic miliary lesions may 
l)ecome confluent and cavitate, and so give rise to the disorder. 
In Scandinavia it is held that progressive pulmonary tuberculosis 
not infrequently develops directly from the acute primary 
pulmonary lesion. In the author’s opinion this method of 
development of phthisis is common in this country, particularly 
when primary infection occurs in adolescence or adult life. 

Chronic pulmonary tuberculosis of the adult tyjK? is only 
rarely seen in children. Above the age of fourteen, however, 
it l>ecome8 increasingly common, the highest case-incidence 
<>c<?urring between nineteen and twenty -five. The morbidity 
rate falls again in succeeding years, but even those of advanced 
i*ge are not infrequently subject to the disease. Radiological 

8 



114 TUBERCULOSIS 

and fluorographic surveys of large populations have shown that 
the prevalence of this disease in the apparently healthy increases 
with age up to a maximum at forty-five years, and that there- 
after a constant level is maintained. 

Pathology. — ^The tissue reactions occurring within the lui^ 
in chronic pulmonary tuberculosis have been described. Certain 
pathological features, howwer, need emphasis. Extension 
of the lesions within the lung may occur by recurrent hsemato- 
genous spread, or more commonly by bronchogenous dissemina- 
tion of the infection from excavated pre-existing foci. The 
size of the cavity, once a bronchus has been eroded, is largely 
determined by the mechanics of the air entry into it. A pull 
is exerted peripherally upon its walls by the elastic retraction 
of the surrounding lung tissue. If the bronchial opening becomes 
partly occluded by debris or by kinking, and so permits air to 
enter the cavity on inspiration more easily than it allows 
egress on expiration, rapid increase in size of the cavity will 
take place imtil the partial obstruction is overcome or becomes 
complete. In the latter case air is slowly absorbed into the 
blood-stream and the cavity tends to close. Fluctuations in 
size not uncommonly take place fairly quickly. Permanent 
closure of the cavity may follow in this way, or sometimes 
may take place if it Incomes entirely choked by caseous debris ; 
while imcommonly epitheliah'sation of its walls takes plaoe 
with heahng of the tuberculous process, and a functional 
bronchiectatic excavation remains. Usually, however, in an 
untreated case, the cavity persists ; bacilli are aspirated into 
adjacent areas of the lung and the disease slowly extends. 
Healing reactions may take place, or may be interrupted by 
fresh bronchogenous or haematogenous spread. Commonly a 
slow, irregularly progressive extension of the disease throughout 
both lungs is seen. In such cases associated iul>erculou8 
lesions of the larynx and of the intestines may develop. Not 
infrequently, also, and especially in advanced cases, amyloid 
disease develops, involving as a rule the spleen, liver, kidneys, 
or intestines. 

At autopsy in a typical advanced case the body is emaciated. 
On opening the thorax, the visceral and parietal pleura) are 
found to be more or less adherent. Adhesions between the 
lobes are always found, and the pleura at the apices is usually 
thickened. The affected areas of lung are diminished in size 
and the remainder is enlarged by compensatory emphysema. 
The heart and trachea are displaced towards the more shrunken 
lung. The lungs themselves, often greatly disorganised, may 
contain little tissue capable of physiological function. They 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 


115 


show in different parts the various changes associated with 
old and active disease, i.c., atelectasis, fibrosis, caseation, 
cavitation, healed calcified foci, and areas of productive tuber- 
culous inflammation. 

Classification. — In the British Isles the clcissification in 
use is that suggested by the Ministry of Health in 1930. Four 
groups are separated as follows : — 

Grade A : Gaees in which tubercle bacilli have never been 
demonstrated in the sputum, pleural fluid, faeces, etc. 
Grade B ; Cases in which tubercle bacilli have at any time 
been found. This Grade is subdivided into three subgroups. 
Grade B1 : Cases with little if any constitutional disturbance, 
exhibiting limited physical signs, and having no complications 
(tuberculous or other). Grade B3 : Cases with marked con- 
stitutional disturbance, severe impairment of function, either 
local or general, and with little or no prospect of recovery. 
This grade includes all cases having grave complications, such 
as diabetes mellitus, tuberculous enteritis, etc. Grade B2 : 
All cases which cannot be placed in Grades B1 or B3. 

Tuberculosis Surveys, — Investigation of the apparently 
healthy has shown that in this way only may we hope to diag- 
nose pulmonary tuberculosis in its earliest stages, when therapy 
is most effective, in a high proportion of cases ; for the disease 
at its onset and for long thereafter may cause no noteworthy 
symptoms. The available methods in use include tuberculin 
reactions, the significance of which has been discussed, 
fluorography, and radiography. Fluorography is economical 
and time-saving and will probably be used increasingly for 
large sections of the population. Quarterly or half-yearly 
re-examination is desirable, and when any abnormality is 
disclosed full investigation is essential. 

Early Symptoms. — The onset of pulmonary tuberculosis 
may be insidious, or it may be characterised by striking 
symptoms which the most xmobservant patient cannot over- 
look. It is commonly stated that the cases presenting a sudden 
onset are those witli the best chance of recovery ; such patients 
tend to submit themselv’^es for treatment at an earlier stage 
of the disease. It is therefore most important that these 
early symptoms should be recognised in their true significance 
by all. A common mode of onset is an acute transient febrile 
illness accompanied by respiratory cata.rrh and malaise, the 
illness resembling influenza. The most outstanding of these 
early manifestations of the disease are haemoptysis and pleurisy. 
Th^ are also common in the later stages of the disease, but 
their value in diagnosis aurises from the fact that tliey sometimes 



116 


TUBERCULOSIS 


occur months before any other definite symptom of pulmonary 
disease, and long before the lesion in the lung is sufficiently 
extensive to present physical signs or even to be discoverable 
by X-ray examination. 

BLaEMOPTYSis. — This is the first symptom in about 10 per 
cent, of cases of phthisis. In its most characteristic form it 
occurs as a sudden free haemorrhage out of a blue sky.** 
The patient, while apparently in i)erfect health, may one day 
feel warm fluid in his mouth and expectorate perhaps as much 
as half a pint of bright red blood. During the succeeding 
twenty-four hours he coughs up clots of darker blood mixed 
with mucus, thus demonstrating that the site of the bleeding 
is in the limgs. Such an event demands the fullest investigation 
and close observation. Haemoptysis occurs in a variety of 
other conditions, but only in early phthisis do we get sudden 
copious bleeding in a patient who is apparently well and who 
is not the subject of cough, expectoration, or dyspnoea. 

Pleurisy. — Pleural effusion in an adult must be regarded 
as indicating tuberculous disease of the lung in the absence 
of some other demonstrable cause, such as cardiac or renal 
disease. The fluid in tuberculous pleurisy is clear, sterile, and 
contains lymphocytes. 

Dry pleurisy is of less significance, and is often non- 
tuberculous. It is, however, a tequent forerunner of phthisis ; 
in tuberculous cases it is usually recurrent and accompanied 
by pjrexia, which subsides when the patient is confined to 
b^, but recurs when he is allowed up. 

Even in the absence of dramatic symptoms a careful 
analysis of the complaints of the patient will sometimes 
enable us to diagnose the disease before it is advanced. The 
characteristic symptoms are : (1) excessive fatigue — the patient 
is exhausted by an ordinary day’s routine which he could 
formerly accomplish without discomfort ; (2) loss of weight — 
this may not be rapid but it is continued, and after a few 
months will be notic*ed by his friends ; (3) failure of appetite — 
in many cases the patient will state that his appetite is good, 
but when asked what he eats for breakfast he will almost 
invariably admit that he has no desire for food in the mornings ; 

(4) amenorrhcea — in yoimg women irregularity or cessation of 
menstruation is a very common symptom of early phthisis ; 

(5) excessive sweating ; the most characteristic example is the 
night-sweat which occurs during deep sleep in the early hours 
of the morning and involves the whole of the skin area ; equally 
common in early phthisis is axillary h3q)eridro8i8, which occurs 
during the day and soaks through the clothes in the arm -pit 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 


117 


even during the coldest weather. Axillary sweating is, however, 
not infrequent in nervous subjects under the influence of emotion. 

The above symptoms are of toxsemic origin. Cough and 
expectoration are pulmonary symptoms often accompanying 
the onset of phthisis. The more important symptom is expec- 
toration ; if this persists for a number of weeks in a young child 
it should arouse suspicion of tuberculous disease. Rej)eated 
microscopic examinations of the sputum are essential and 
should if necessary be supplemented by culture or guinea-pig 
inoculation. 

Physical Signs of Early Phthisis. — Fever . — Observation of 
the temperature range while the patient is up and about will 
show an abnormal diurnal variation in many early cases. 
The temperature may be recorded in the mouth or the rectum. 
Mouth readings are reliable if taken with care in patients 
who are not dyspnoeic and who are not mouth-breathers. In' 
phthisical patients it will often be found that the morning 
temperature is unnaturally low, and that during the afternoon 
or evening it rises above normal to the extent of half a degree 
Falirenheit or more. In women undue attention should not 
be paid to records taken during the week preceding menstrua- 
tion, as many healthy women show a slight rise of temperature 
at that time. 

Tachycardia . — The pulse-rate is very ofkm quickened 
in early phthisis, even when the patient is apyrexial. A pulse- 
rate persistently below 80 beats per minute is presumptive 
evidence against a diagnosis of progressive tuberculosis. 

Signs in the Chest . — In its early stages pulmonary tuber- 
culosis is not usually accompanied by abnormal physical signs 
in the chest, and consequently radiological and other investiga- 
tions should never be withheld in ('uses where the symptoma- 
tology is suggestive because the lungs a}>pear normal to routine 
physical examination. However, in established but not 
nec^essarily advanced disease, on inspection wasting of muscles 
over the back of a disea.sed aj)ex may be found. The muscle 
most affected is usually the supraspinatus ; indeed most of 
the abnormal signs will be found posteriorly. Later in many 
cases there is also falling in of the soft parts above and below 
the clavicle. Diminished movement of the upper chest may 
also be detected. 

Light percussion may reveal impaired resonance at the apex 
of the lung. The note obtained over corresponding points 
on the two sides should be compared while the patient holds 
his breath with the lungs fully inflated. The most important 
situations for percussion in front are above the clavicles, below 



118 TUBERCULOSIS 

their outer thirds, and direct percussion on the shafts of these 
bones. Posteriorly the apex should be percussed over the 
first and second interspaces. In normal subjects it is not 
uncommon to find the right apex less resonant than the left 
in iBront, but any such difference over the posterior aspect of 
the upper chest is of pathological significance. Impairment 
of resonance is sometimes met with at an early stage of the 
disease at the top of the axilla, or in the region between the 
vertebral column and the inner border of the scapula. 

Auscultation , — In early phthisis the breath-sounds in the 
neighbourhood of the lesion are sometimes feeble. During 
ordinary breathing no added sounds may be audible, but 
accompanying or immediately after a cough crepitations or 
fine rales are often to be detected. Bronchial or tubular 
breathing is not heard. 

The spoken voice will be conducted normally ; pectoriloquy 
will only be obtained with a considerable area of consolidation 
or a cavity and is not therefore an early sign. 

Symptoms and Signs in Later Stages. — In the later stages 
the toxagmia is shown by a hectic swinging temperature which 
may range from 97° F. in the morning to 102° F. at night. 
Moreover, the pyrexia which at first was only present when 
the patient was up can no longer be subdued even by pro- 
longed rest in bed. The body is wasted, the cheeks flushed, the 
eyes bright and sunken, the lips dry. The fingers may be 
clubbed, the nails being thin and dull, in these respects differing 
from the very thick polished nails seen on the clubbed fingers 
of the bronchiectatic. The breath has a peculiar stale sweetish 
odour, not grossly offensive as in lung abscess ; the sputum 
is copious, purulent, and nummular, i.e., it floats in separate 
rounded lumps in the sputum-cup. Dyspnoea and cyanosis 
may be well marked. 

The voice may be husky if laryngitis has developed, while 
dyspepsia, constipation or diarrhoea may arise either reflexly 
or as a result of tuberculous enteritis. 

As the disease advances weakness and languor increase, 
the appetite does not fail completely, but it becomes capricious 
and the patient feels a craving for unusual and highly seasoned 
dishes. Sleep is disturbed by the frequent cough and copious 
expectorations, also by profuse night-sweats. The mentality 
remains clear to the end, and the patient complains little 
unless he be tortured by the pain of severe laryngeal ulceration. 
There is often an unnatural sense of well-being and hopefulnees 
of recovery, the spes phthisica of the older writers. 

Besides the retraction of the upper parts of the thoracic 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 119 

wall and displacement of the mediastinum, immobility over 
the diseased areas of lung will be noted. Over extensive in- 
filtration movement and air entry are often restricted, expiration 
prolonged, and rales and rhonchi may be audible, especially 
after coughing. Consolidation is characterised by impaired 
resonance, bronchial breathing, pectoriloquy, and crackling 
rales ; fibrosis and atelectasis by poor movement and air 
entry, a prominent sternomastoid muscle, impaired percussion 
note, and mediastinal displacement toward the affected side. 
Over a cavity characteristic signs may be obtained if it is 
both large and superficial. In these circumstances tympanitic 
reasonance may be obtained in the centre of an area of dullness, 
with amphoric breath-sounds and crackling r&les. Whispering 
pectoriloquy is strikingly obvious, and not infrequently it 
sounds as though two persons were whispering in unison, a 
sign known as “ echoing pectoriloquy.” With small cavities 
or even large ones that are not superficial, these characteristic 
signs are absent, and either no abnormal signs, or only those of 
surrounding infiltration or fibrosis may be obtained. 

Coarse. — ^The progress of a case of chronic ulcerative tuber- 
culosis is usually one of alternate remissions and exacerbations. 
Adequate treatment in the early stages may bring about 
quiescence and arrest of the disease, but even while under 
treatment serious relapses occur, sometimes apparently depend- 
ent on undue exposure to the sun’s rays, sometimes associated 
with an indiscreet resumption of increased exertion, or following 
haemoptysis. Most frequently, however, no cause can be found 
to explain the relapse. After the disease has been arrested 
it may again become active as a result of other diseases, of an 
unhygienic mode of life, or of any factor which lowers resistance, 
and in women one of the common causes of reactivation is 
pregnancy. On the other hand, there are many cases in which 
the disease, though never arrested, dies down to a low grade 
of smouldering activity for months or years at a time. During 
these periods of remission there may be no pyrexia and 
little toxaemia, although the sputum may teem with tubercle 
bacilli. 

Modes of Death. — ^A fatal termination is most commonly 
brought about by a gradual failure of strength, the result of 
poisoning by the toxins of the tubercle bacilli and of increasingly 
impaired respiration. Haemorrhage is not often the immediate 
cause of death, but rupture of an aneurysm in a tuberculous 
cavity brings some cases to an abrupt end, the patient drowning 
in his own blood. 

Not infrequently death is due to extension of the disease 



120 TUBERCULOSIS 

to other organs ; ulceration of the larynx with severe dysphagia 
may prevent the swallowing of food, ulceration of the intestines 
may cause exhausting diarrhoea, or the entry of bacilli into the 
blood stream may le^ to miliary tuberculosis. 

Other Varieties of Pulmonary Tuberculosis 

Fibroid Phthisis. — Tliis variety of the disease is characterised 
by the formation of much fibrous tissue in the affected areas 
of the lungs, accompanied by atelectasis. The diseased areas 
are shrunken, the pleura is thick and adherent, and elsewhere 
the lungs are enlarged by compensatory emphysema. Physical 
examination reveals clubbing of the fingers, retraction of the 
(*hest wall and displacement of the heart and trachea toward 
the more affected lung, and often a striking variety of signs 
dependent upon excavation, atelectasis, fibrosis, and bronchi- 
ectasis. The disease runs a very chronic course with little 
pyrexia or constitutional disturbance. The patient may be 
dyspnoeic and cyanosed. Tuberculous tracheo -bronchitis, and 
enteritis often develop. Repeated hsernoptyscs are common. 
After many years of slight ill-health the end may come fairly 
quickly as a result of heart failure, amyloid disease, or tuber- 
culous meningitis. 

Tuberculous Pneumonia. — Tuberculous pneumonia is un- 
common save in young subjects. The disease often proceeds to 
a fatal termination in a few weeks or months, without any 
remission. In the lungs the changes may take the form of a 
caseating lobar pneumonia, with which there is little protective 
formation of fibrous tissue (vide Plate 8). In other cases the 
pathological changes arc those of broncho pneumonia, with 
patches of consolidation scattered over both lungs. In the 
latter type the physical signs are at first those of a diffuse 
bronchitis ; tubular breathing and crackling rales give evidence 
of areas of consolidation after a week or two. Liquefaction 
with excavation is common in each form, as is atelectasis in 
the less acute cases. Broncho-pneumonic ])hthiHi8 not in- 
frequently follows a brisk haemoptysis. 

Symptoms , — There may occur a prodromal stage of vague 
iU-health lasting several weeks, then a sudden exacerbation 
with chill, fever, pain in the chest, and cough. The patient 
is forced to remain in bed by weakness and dj^spnoea. Sustained 
or remittent high pyrexia occurs together with rapid emaciation. 
The sputum may at first be frothy and blood-stained, but it 
soon becomes green and nummular and swarms with bacilli. 
In the great majority of cases death results from toxamiia 



I’l.ATi: 7 

< ’hnuiir |>ulin<nmr\- i ul>< r(‘ul< fibrosis and excavation 
of tlw riLdit uj)|H*r lobr ha> occurretl ami t)i<‘re has f«,>Ilo\\t'd a 
scit»udar\’ s}iM‘ad into the luultlU' /.one <*f tin left Imp. 


( 7\> fac€ paije Il!(b 





I^I.ATK S 

Tubt‘r< ul<>iis piK'unioDia jiivoU inu Hourly th<*oHtiro r i^rlit 
lulls/- KxoavatKHi i- just h< '/inruns/ at 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 121 

within a few months, and the disease is not usually improved 
by collapse therapy. 

Senile Phthisis. — ^Pulmonary tuberculosis is quite common 
in elderly subjects, and is a jfrequent cause of death in inmates 
of almshouses and other institutions for the aged. The course 
is usually slow, but no treatment is effective in arresting its 
progress. Both the symptoms and the physical signs are 
often masked by accompan 3 dng bronchitis and emphysema. 
Fairly typical X-ray appearances are shown on Plate 9. 

Complications of Pulmonary Tuberculosis. — Secondary 
Infections , — Bronchi in diseased areas in the lungs are often 
secondarily infected, and if cavities are present the toxaemia 
from these secondary infections may overshadow the sjmiptoms 
due to the original tuberculous disease. The organisms 
commonly found are the Staphylococcus aureus, pneumococcus, 
and streptococcus. 

Pulmonary atelectasis widelj^ var\nng in degree 
commonly complicates pulmonarj'^ tuberculosis. In well 
marked cases the paucity of the s 3 m)ptoms, and the relatively 
chronic course of the disease, contrasts strongly with the 
apparenth" gross phj^sical signs and striking radiological appear- 
ances. The sputum in such cases as a rule peisistentlj^ contains 
tubercle bacilli. Bronchiectasis far more frequentlj^ complicates 
phthisis than is usualh- suspected, as also does tuberculous 
tracheobronchitis. 

Pleura , — The pleura never escapes inflammatorj" change, 
and in the majority of cases there are found thickening at the 
apex and adhesions uniting the lobes of the lung to one another, 
and attaching them to the chest wall. Rupture of an adhesion 
may clause spontaneous pneumothorax, hjdro-pneumothorax, 
or tuberculous empjrema. 

Infection of Tissues by Sputum , — The passage of infected 
sputum may lead to tuberculous ulceration of the larjmx or 
of the tip of the tongue. If the sputum is swallowed the 
infection will be carried down the alimentary tract, and may 
cause intestinal tuberculosis. The Peyer s patches of the ileum 
will be chiefly affected. 

Fistula in ano is very often secondary to pulmonary tuber- 
culosis, and is of special interest, as it is a complication which 
may occur early in the disease, sometimes long before the 
patient is aware that he has a lesion in the lung. 

M etastaiic Complications , — Haunatogenous dissemination, 
though much commoner after primary infection, may occur 
and may give rise to miliary tuberculosis, or ma^ lead to the 
development of tuberculosis in, for example, the central nervous 



122 TUBERCULOSIS 

system, heart, kidney, epididymis, suprarenal, or one of the 
larger joints. 

Amyloid Disease, — ^The prolonged toxaemia may cause 
amyloid degeneration of the solid viscera or bowel. Clinical 
evidence of this complication appears as oedema, diarrhoea, 
profuse albuminuria, and enlargement of the liver and spleen. 

Prognosis. — There is no disease in which prognosis is more 
diflScult, and there is an old saying that “ he who attempts to 
forecast the outlook may be sure of one thing only, that he 
will be mistaken.” Autopsy experience shows that the disease 
may heal at almost any stage. There are, however, certain 
factors which help us to form an estimate as to the chances of 
recovery, or, failing this, of the probable duration of life. 

Type of Disease. — Those cases of acute miliary tuberculosis 
in which the lungs are predominently involved are as a rule 
fatal, and tuberculous pneumonia almost equally hopeless. 
In the other types, those cases in which there is a predominence 
of fibrotic change are more hopeful than those in w hich there 
is much caseation and cavity formation. The disease may 
become arrested, and apparent health may be maintained 
for years in spite of cavitation. 

Extent of Damage in the lungs is not a reliable guide to 
prognosis ; the rate at which the destructive process advances 
is of much greater significance. 

Toxcemia. — Pyrexia not quickly subdued by rest in bed is 
of grave import, as is tachycardia, even without pjrexia. 

Age and Habits of the Patient. — An unfavourable course 
must be expected if sAmiptoms occur below^ the age of eighteen 
or above that of fifty years. Effective treatment smd after-care 
may be impossible if the patient is of an impatient tempera- 
ment or low intelligence, or if his financial resources are 
insufficient to provide adequate rest and nourishment. Alco- 
holism is always a most unfavourable feature. 

Presence of Complications. — Ulceration of the larynx or of 
the bowel add very greatly to the gravity of the outlook in 
any stage of the disease, but do not make it necessarily hopeless. 
Diabetes melhtus, silicosis, and pregnancy tend seriously to 
aggravate the disease. 

Diagnosis. — It is of the utmost importance that pulmonary 
tuberculosis should be recognised at an early stage. The 
chance of arresting the disease may be irrevocably lost if 
treatment is delayed for several months. Delay in diagnosis is 
common for two reasons ; firstly, because the onset is often 
insidious and patients do not seek advice until the disease has 
become firmly established ; secondly, because practitioners 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 


123 


wait for the appearance of physical signs in the chest before 
committing themselves to a diagnosis. The increasing use of 
fluorography should diminish the consequences of the first, 
the second should not arise. 

If the onset is heralded by dramatic symptoms such as 
haemoptysis or pleurisy, the practitioner should insist upon 
early and adequate investigation. When the onset is insidious 
the diagnosis is based on a careful synthesis of the symptoms 
and history. Absence of a history of contact with the infection 
is of no significance. Confirmation is sought by observation 
of the daily range of temperature ; afternoon pyrexia may be 
present only if the patient is allowed to take exercise. It is 
characteristic of tuberculous toxaemia that a brisk two -mile 
walk will raise the temj>erature unduly, and that it will not 
subside to normal within thirty minutes. 

The most satisfactory proof of the diagnosis is the 
demonstration of tubercle bacilli in the sputum. If the first 
examination is negative, it should be repeated several times, 
and attempts should be made to culture the organism ; in 
cases where there is no expectoration, the bacilli should be 
searched for in the gastric residue. Various sputum-concentra- 
tion methods or the examination of a laryngeal sw^ab may also 
be of assistance in finding the organism. 

In every case in w^hich pulmonary tuberculosis is suspected 
efficient radiological examination of the chc-^t is essential. Such 
an examination is equally necessary as a guide to treatment 
once the diagnosis has been made. 

The common appearances of adult t>q)e pulmonary tuber- 
culosis in raxliographs are : (1) Infiltration, which takes the 
form of fluffy opacities with ill-defined margins localised or 
scattered over the lung fields w ithout apparent relation to the 
arrangement of the vessels or bronchi ; (2) Cavitation, which is 
seen as a more or less dense ring-shadow , the low er part of w hich 
may show a fluid level ; (3) Larger confluent opacities of 
varying size ; (4) Fibrotic strands, or thickened pleura ; and 
(5) Lobar, or lobular atelectasis, with mediastinal displacement. 

Tomography will show that the bulk of the lesions are 
situated posteriorly and may help in the localisation of cavities. 

None of the physical signs elicited by examination of the 
chest are diagnostic of pulmonary tuberculosis. However, 
abnormal signs in the apical or subapical regions are suggestive 
and help to confirm other evidence. 

Active and Inactive Pulmonary Tuberculosis. — The presence 
of tubercle bacilli in the sputum is certain evidence of activity. 
In the absence of such a finding active disease may be presumed 



124 


TUBERCULOSIS 


if (1) radiological evidence of pulmonary tuberculosis exists and, 
in addition, any one or more of the following are present ; 
(2) imdoubted symptoms and signs of active disease, e,g., 
pyrexia, loss of weight, anorexia, night sweats, etc. ; (3) 

otherwise unexplained persistent elevation of the sedimentation 
rate ; (4) altering tuberculous radiological appearances on 

serial examination particularly if fresh infiltration or excavation 
should appear. 

Differential Diagnosis. — variety of conditions may be 
mistaken for pulmonary tuberculosis, both in its early and 
later stages. 

Various forms of pneumonia may simulate pulmonary 
tuberculosis clinically and even radiologically, but usually the 
diagnosis becomes clear if the patient is kept under observation. 
It is seldom justifiable to diagnose pulmonary tuberculosis 
on a single X-ray of the chest, unless other findings supix)rt 
the diagnosis. 

Hyperthyroidism mid Anxiety Neurosis may simulate early 
phthisis with symptoms such as tachycardia, loss of weight, 
and amenorrhoea, but do not cause the remittent ]>yrexia of 
phthisis. 

Haemoptysis is common in mitral stenosis, bronxhiexiasis, 
lung abscess, and jmlmonary neoplasm. 

Clubbing of the fingers witli pyrexia and taehyc^ardia may 
be due to subacute bacterial endocarditis. Malaise, pyrexia, 
tachycardia, and loss of weight are associated with some 
generalised infections such as undulant fever, and sometimes 
with focal sep.sis such as chronic sinusitis, and the latter may 
provoke recurrent or chronic bronchitis. 

In most cases of chronic pulmonary tuberculosis rej>eated 
examinations of the sputum will rev^eal tubercle bacilli ; elastic 
fibres may be found in the sputum in chhos of ])uhnonary 
tuberculosis and pulmonary suppuration. 


Treatment of PrLMONAKv Ti BEiu ri.osis 

Effective chemotherapy or irnmuno-t herupy are not available 
for this disease. Treatment, therefore, is limited to measures 
which have as their object the diminution of toxamiia and the 
promotion of natural healing of the lesions. Long exi>erience 
has shown that of these measures rest is fundamental, and that 
whole-hearted co-operation by the patient is essential for 
success. 

Treatment of the Early Case. — As soon as th(^ diagnosis has 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 


125 


been made, the patient should be confined to bed for a period 
of complete rest. This rest period may be carried out in the 
patient’s home, in a well-ventilated room, under the supervision 
of a trained nurse. No restrictions are placed on diet except 
as regards alcohol ; meals should stimulate the appetite, 
should be small and frequent, and should include abundance 
of milk, butter, and raw fruit. Cod-liver oil and Vitamin C 
may be given throughout the whole period of treatment and 
during the winter months for several years after. If the patient 
is poor, or if the home conditions are otherwise unsuitable, 
he must be placed in a hospital. He should not be in contact 
with non-tuberculous patients, especially children. 

The activity of the tuberculous lesions is assessed repeatedly 
by the aggregate evidence which symptoms, signs, temperature, 
repeatc^d X-ray and sputum examinations, and such tests as 
the blood sedimentation rate, and a differential leucocyte 
count present. Every endeavour should be made to persist 
with complete rest until all evidence of active disease has 
disappeared. This principle applies whatever other treat- 
ment may be used in every ease for which hope of recovery 
exists. 

Sanatorium Treatment. — Sanatorium treatment is in general 
suitable for early and a high proportion of moderately advanced 
cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. The patient and his relatives 
require reassurance on two points : firstly, may not residence 
at a sanatorium stamp the inmate as a consumptive and render 
him an object of dread for the rest of his life ; secondly, when 
at the institution will he mix with patients in a more advanced 
stage of the disease from w hom he may contract a more virulent 
infection ; neither of these suppositions is correct. Sanatoria 
do not broadcast the names of their inmates ; moreover, 
notification of all cases of active tuberculosis is the statutory 
duty of every practitioner wiiether the patient goes to a 
sanatorium or not. As regards the second point, a patient who 
is suffering from the disease is believed to be relatively immune 
to reinfection. 

Choice of Sanatorium . — Before recx)mraending a sanatorium, 
the practitioner should be satisfied that tbe staff are efficient 
and conscientious. Provided that careful skilled observation 
is available, the situation and climatic conditions are of 
secondary imix)rtanoe. Careful consideration of the financial 
consequences of a prolonged stay must be undertaken before- 
hand ; while factors such as the age, temperament, the social 
position of the patient, and the difficulty of the joiimey involved 
are also important in this decision. Financial support to the 



126 TUBERCULOSIS 

family of the patient when needed is increasingly becoming a 
state liability. 

General Principles of Sanatorium Treatment , — ^Throughout 
his stay in the sanatorium the patient is encouraged and studied. 
When to the above criteria his lesions seem inactive, rest is 
modified and minor activities are gradually permitted. He is 
later slowly inured to an outdoor existence, and is allowed up 
for increasing periods. He is permitted to take more and more 
exercise, and finally graduates to manual labour. Occupational 
therapy and training for a modified life in the future is very 
often essential. If, for example, pyrexia recurs at any time, 
the patient reverts to complete rest, and when inactivity of 
the disease may again be presumed he is worked up through 
the various grades of phj-sieal exertion once more. 

He is educated in a strict routine which he is to follow for 
the rest of his Hfe. This mcludes intolerance of un ventilated 
rooms, avoidance of heavy clothing both by day and night, regular 
periods for rest and meals, avoidance of hurry, fatigue, and excite- 
ment. If there is sputum he is taught to dispose of it in such 
a way that it may not be a danger to others, and he is trained not 
to swallow it lest it should infect his own alimentary tract. 

After-care . — On leaving the sanatorium the patient should 
be kept under regular clinical and radiological observation 
for several years. If he is a wage-earner he must be advised 
as to possible modifications of his work in order that he may 
avoid long hours and periods of stress, without reducing his 
earning capacity to the level of privation. Some financial 
support from the State or other source is commonly desirable 
at this time. A change of employment from a sedentary 
occupation to laborious work out of doors is seldom advisable. 
Female i^atients must l>e warned to avoid the risk of pregnancy 
until to every available test tlie disease has been an’ested for 
four or five years. 

Accessory Methods of Treatment — If toxsemia cannot be 
controlled by complete rest in bed, if the disease is advancing 
rapidly, or if relapse takes place during or shortly after the 
routine measures just described, other methods must be 
employed. The most effective of these are described under the 
term ‘‘ collapse therapy.’’ 

CoiXAPSB Thbrapy. — ^The principle underlying this treat- 
ment is comparable with the usual method of dealing with 
tuberculous arthritis. One of the first principles in the treat- 
ment of a tuberculous joint is to secure immobilisation of the 
inflamed parts. With respiration the lungs are moved and 
stretched continually, and the flow of blood, lymph, air and 



PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS 127 

sputum through them is modified and varied. The process 
may impede the healing of lesions, and disseminate toxins and 
organisms. It is possible to immobilise the diseased areas of 
the lungs without unduly reducing the functional efficiency 
of the remainder. 

Collapse therapy is indicated in most cases in which the 
tuberculous disease is confined to one lung, and a prompt 
response is not obtained to rest and sanatorium treatment. 
It should be employed in all imilateral cases if there is cavitation, 
or if there are complications such as tuberculous larjmgitis or 
pregnancy. In general, this treatment must be modified or 
not undertaken if there is (1) radiographic evidence of active 
disease in the opposite lung ; (2) dyspnoea when at rest, 

generalised emphysema, or other evidence of a seriously 
diminished respiratory function. 

The least severe and dangerous of the possibly effective 
tj 7 )es of collapse therapy is as a rule first attempted. Should 
it fail, however, the next mor6 drastic method usually becomes 
desirable. 

Relaxation of the lung is achieved by inducing an artificial 
pneumothorax, t.e., introducing air into the pleural cavity. 
The lung is slowly and partially collapsed by periodical injections 
of sterile air, and the collapse is maintained by repeated “ refills ’’ 
for a period of three or more years. In experienced hands 
the dangers are not greater than those of other minor operations, 
and the results have been good. The treatment can be con- 
tinued while the patient is engaged in active work ; complete 
arrest of the disease has been obtained in many cases in which 
the ordinary constitutional treatment had failed. Satisfactory 
results, however, must not be anticipated from unilateral 
pneumothorax unless the method be employed only when 
X-ray examination shows the better Imig to be stiU free from 
extensive disease. 

Bilateral artificial pneumothorax is sometimes employed 
with advantage, more especially where thin-walled cavities are 
present m both lungs, and where selective collapse can be 
obtained. By “ selective ’’ is meant the full collapse of diseased 
portions of the limgs with relatively little interference with the 
healthy areas. In practice it is found that, in the absence of 
adhesions, diseased areas collapse more readily than healthy 
lung, so that selective coUapse often occurs naturally under 
these conditions. 

The commonest cause of failure in treatment by artificial 
pneumothorax, whether unilateral or bilateral, is the presence 
of adhesions over the area in which collapse is required. In 



128 


TUBERCULOSIS 


such cases the help of a surgeon should be invoked for the direct 
examination of these adhesions through the thoracoscope, so 
that he may proceed to divide them with a cautery, if this be 
practicable {vide Plates 10 and 11). A contraselective pneumo- 
thorax should not be continued. 

Revocable collapse therapy is also provided by crushing 
the phrenic nerve. Hemidiaphragmatic paralysis which lasts 
about four months results, and it is suitable for some early 
cases with unilateral infiltration with or without early excava- 
tion. The collapse may be made permanent by evulsion of the 
neiwe, and either measure may on occasion be usefully com- 
bined with artificial pneumothorax. The effect of phrenic 
paralysis is sometimes supplemented by induction of a pneumo- 
peritoneum. Cases in w hich the disease is relatively quiescent, 
for the most part unilateral, and in which extensive excavation 
and fibrosis are present often cannot be treated efficiently by 
artificial pneumotliorax or phrenic nerve paralysis. In such 
cases it may be necessary selectively to collapse (by compression) 
the diseased area by thoracoplasty. The modern operation, 
which is extrapleural, involves the resection of some or all of 
the upper ten ribs, depending on the extent of the disease. 
It has been found advisable, if the lesion is extensive, to perform 
tlie resection in several stages. Regeneration of l>ony tissue 
occurs later leaving a rigid j)ermanently collapsed chest wall. 
The operation is much more hazardous than the induction 
of a pneumothorax, but many excellent results have been 
achieved. Prior to thoracoplasty, when the pleural surfaces 
are adherent and when an upper lobe cavity is present, suction- 
drainage of the cavity as descril>€d by Monaldi may improve 
the patient's condition, and may make possible a less extensive 
subsequent operation. Following thoracoplasty, physiotherapy 
is essential to prev^ent deformity. When the respiraWry 
reserve is adequate artificial pneumothorax for a more acute 
lesion on the opposite side may be combined w ith thoracoplasty. 
The operations of apicolysis and extra pleural pneumothorax 
have been for the most part abandoned. 

fiFECiFic Treatment. — Tuberculin has as yet proved to 
be ineffective and dangerous in the treatment of pulmonary 
tuberculosis. A preparation of living but avirulent tubercle 
bacilli, known as B.C.G., has been succ^essfully used on the 
Continent and in the U.8,A. for the prophylactic immunisation 
of infants, children, and previously uninfected young adults. 

C^fEMOTHERAPY. — ^No drug has a curative effect in tuber- 
culosis comparable with that of the salvarsan group in syphilis. 
(Occasionally benefit may be obtained in some cases from 




Pl.ATK fO 

aitifiiiHl I >iKuiiic»t h4^rax , showing tlit* hiiig 
(A) and an uncolla j>Ht*d «a\ity(n) in the i iglit ufiper lobe 
hc'hl <»ut )\v a^lh^ sions (<-')• 


m 


Pl.ATK I 1 

'rht‘ nnine < fiac' after the a«lhesioiis have l>et'n tiividfHi. 
The lung edge- in vinibh* at a. The disetiaed area 
ahowH c*oiii|>letA* »ele<’tiv«* collapse. 

[T'u face ihi€j^ I2S. 





PtJLMONARY tuberculosis lid 

injections of sodium-gold thiosulphate (Crisalbine, Novacrysin, 
Sanocrysin). The drug is injected intravenously in aqueous 
solution, starting with 0*05 grm. Increasing amounts up to 
about 0*75 grm. are given at weekly intervals, so that a total 
of from 4 to 6 grm. are given in a course lasting some six 
or twelve weeks. Other gold preparations, usually in oily 
suspension, are sometimes administered intramuscularly. 

Severe reactions to the drug may occur. These include 
exfoliative dermatitis, nephritis, stomatitis, gastro-enteritis, 
anaemia, and agranulocytosis, and their premonitory symptoms 
or signs when observed contraindicate further injections. 
The urine should be tested before each injection. The drug, 
furthermore, should not be used in incipient or acute types of 
pulmonary tuberculosis since in these it tends to cause extension 
and aggravation of the disease. 

Heliotherapy. — Exposure of the body to sunlight or 
ultra-violet light, since it tends to cause exacerbation of the 
disease, is harmful in cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. 

Village Settlements. — Patients with apparently arrested, or 
relatively inactive chronic disease, who are capable of modified 
work under medical supervision, may retain their health longer 
under the conditions obtaining in a village settlement, such 
as Papworth. The psychology of the patient is of importance 
in the selection of those suitable for this life ; and as a method 
of treatment it has the advantage of reducing the source from 
which the general population becomes infected. 

Treatment of Symptoms. — Cough , — If coughing produces 
expectoration it must not be discouraged ; but a dry, unproduc- 
tive cough is harmful, and the patient must be taught to control 
it. If sleej) is interfered with, the cough may be reduced at 
night by an occasional teaspoonful of syrup of codein. 

Expertoraiion , — Profuse expectoration is largely due to 
secjondary infections. These may be diminished by inhalations 
of turpentine and steam and bj'^ the regular emptying out of 
cavities in the lungs bj'^ postural exercises. 

IIcemoptyHi ^, — An initial haemoptysis is seldom immediately' 
dangerous to life, though it may cause broncho-pneumonic 
extension of the disease, and in every case it is alarming to 
the patient. It is essential that he should be reassured and 
kept quiet. If the bleeding is profuse, the patient should be 
laid supine wherever he may happen to be and \ gr. of morphia 
should be injected at once. Larger doses of morphia are 
dangerous on account of its action in abolishing the cough 
reflex. The inhalation of the vapour from a capsule containing 
5 minims of amyl nitrite may check the haemoptysis. A blood 



iso Tuberculosis 

transfusion given by the drip method is sometimes of value 
later, and effective coughing is promoted if the patient is nursed 
in the Fowler position. 

Only rarely is it justified or indeed possible to arrest severe 
haemoptysis by the induction of an artificial pneumothorax. 
Needless to say, this should only be attempted when it is 
tolerably certain in which lung the bleeding is taking place. 

Slight haemoptysis, or mere staining of the sputum, calls for 
no special treatment. It may be evidence of increased activity 
and so indicate the need for rest in bed. 

Treatment of Advanced Phthisis. — In advanced cases treat- 
ment is designed to make life as tolerable as possible ; and, 
as cure is hardly to be hoped for, restrictions are relaxed 
except such as prevent dissemination of infection to others. 
The patient is allowed up and about, even though pyrexial. 
Many of his s3unptoms may be due to secondary infections in 
the lungs and resulting bronchitis. These render him intolerant 
of cold and exposure, so that an indoor life becomes desirable. 
The usual treatment for bronchitis should be employed — 
antiseptic inhalations and a warm, moist atmosphere during 
the acute stage, while alkaline expectorants and vaccines will 
ameliorate a concurrent chronic bronchitis. On no account 
should such a patient be sent to a mountain resort, for this 
will only add dyspncea to his other troubles. Treatment of 
comphcations such as laryngeal and intestinal ulceration is 
dealt with in the sections devoted to these lesions. 


TUBERCULOSIS OF THE PLEURA 

The pleura is involved in all cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Changes of varying extent are found at autopsy, even if there 
have been no clinical manifestations of pleurisy. If pleurisy 
occurs in a patient with other evidence of phthisis, its true nature 
is easily recognised ; when, however, the lungs are apparently 
healthy, a diagnosis of ‘‘ idiopathic pleurisy ’’ is often made. 
There can be no doubt that the majority of these are tuberculous. 
In the absence of heart disease and nephritis, recurrent attacks 
of dry pleurisy,^ or a single attack persisting for two or more 
weeks, or pleurisy with effusion must be regarded as significant 
of incipient phthisis. 

Pleurisy with effusion occurs most commonly in adolescents 
and young adults, and only rarely in young children or the 
aged. Males are more frequently affected than females. 

Tuberculous pleurisy and pleurisy with effusion may occur 



TUBERCULOSIS OF THE PLEURA 131 

within a few months of primary infection, while exposure to cold, 
overwork, and undernourishment are precipitating factors. 

Pathology and Morbid Anatomy. — ^The pleural surfaces, 
first the visceral and then the parietal, lose their lustre and 
become dull and congested. A fibrinous exudate is formed, 
and in course of time this becomes organised and replaced 
by fibrous tissue which binds the surfaces together. Similar 
adhesions are found between the lobes of lungs affected by 
tuberculosis. They are often dense and firm over the posterior 
aspect of the apex, and more slender and band-like over the 
front of the upper lobe at the level of the third, fourth, and 
fifth ribs. Sometimes the entire pleural cavity is obliterated, 
and the lung so firmly attached to the chest wall that it cannot 
be removed without tearing. A localised patch may be much 
thickened and calcified, forming a calcareous plaque. 

In some cases a variable quantity of fluid exudate is poured 
out, and the condition becomes one of pleurisy with effusion. 
The exudate is usually serofibrinous, of a clear yellow or 
slightly greenish tinge, containing flocculi of coagulated fibrin ; 
occasionally it is blood stained. Usually in tuberculous 
effusions the majority of the cells are small lymphocytes, but 
in the early stages a preponderance of polymorphonuclear 
cells may be found. Effusions which are absorbing frequently 
contain high proportions of eosinophils. Tubercle baciUi are 
seldom foxmd by direct examination, even after centrifugahsing 
the fluid, but culture or injection into a guinea-pig will usually 
demonstrate their presence. 

Sometimes the fluid rapidly becomes turbid and purulent 
and a tuberculous empyema results. The latter, however, is 
more often a complication of established phthisis. In many 
such cases examination of the sediment shows it to consist of 
structureless debris. Tubercle bacilli are usually present, 
while secondary infection is not uncommon. 

Dry Pleurisy 

Symptoms and Signs. — Pleurisy accompanying active 
phthisis may cause no symptoms whatever, but as a rule there 
is a feeling of chilliness with sudden rise in the temperature 
and pulse-rate, followed by more or less dyspnoea and pain. 
The severity of the pain varies with the situation of the pleurisy. 
If it is at the apex, there will be little more than a dull ache ; 
but if it is over the more mobile portions of the lung such as 
the axillary or diaphragmatic surfaces, it may be agonising, 
and it is always aggravated by cough or deep inspiration. 



i 30 Tuberculosis 

transfusion given by the drip method is sometimes of value 
later, and effective coughing is promoted if the patient is nursed 
in the Fowler position. 

Only rarely is it justified or indeed possible to arrest severe 
haemoptysis by the induction of an artificial pneumothorax. 
Needless to say, this should only be attempted when it is 
tolerably certain in which lung the bleeding is taking place. 

Slight haemoptysis, or mere staining of the sputum, calls for 
no special treatment. It may be evidence of increased activity 
and so indicate the need for rest in bed. 

Treatment of Advanced Phthisis. — In advanced cases treat- 
ment is designed to make life as tolerable as possible ; and, 
as cure is hardly to be hoped for, restrictions are relaxed 
except such as prevent dissemination of infection to others. 
The patient is allowed up and about, even though pyrexial. 
Many of his symptoms may be due to secondary infections in 
the lungs and resulting bronchitis. These render him intolerant 
of cold and exposure, so that an indoor life becomes desirable. 
The usual treatment for bronchitis should be employed — 
antiseptic inhalations and a warm, moist atmosphere during 
the acute stage, while alkaline expectorants and vaccines will 
ameUorate a conoxirrent chronic bronchitis. On no account 
should such a patient be sent to a moimtain resort, for this 
will only add dyspnoea to his other troubles. Treatment of 
comphcations such as laryngeal and intestinal ulceration is 
dealt with in the sections devoted to these lesions. 


TUBERCULOSIS OF THE PLEURA 

The pleura is involved in all cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Changes of var3dng extent are foirnd at autopsy, even if there 
have been no clinical manifestations of pleurisy. If pleurisy 
occurs in a patient with other evidence of phthisis, its true nature 
is easily recognised ; when, however, the lungs are apparently 
healthy, a diagnosis of idiopathic pleurisy ” is often made. 
There can be no doubt that the majority of these are tuberculous. 
In the absence of heart disease and nephritis, recurrent attacks 
of dry pleurisy,^ or a single attack persisting for two or more 
weeks, or pleurisy with effusion must be regarded as significant 
of incipient phthisis. 

Pleurisy with effusion occurs most commonly in adolescents 
and young adults, and only rarely in young children or the 
aged. Males are more frequently affected than females. 

Tuberculous pleurisy and pleurisy with effusion may occur 



TUBERCULOSIS OF THE PLEURA 131 

within a few months of primary infection, while exposure to cold, 
overwork, and undernourishment are precipitating factors. 

Pathology and Morbid Anatomy. — ^The pleural surfaces, 
first the visceral and then the parietal, lose their lustre and 
become dull and congested. A fibrinous exudate is formed, 
and in course of time this becomes organised and replaced 
by fibrous tissue which binds the surfaces together. Similar 
adhesions are found between the lobes of lungs affected by 
tuberculosis. They are often dense and firm over the posterior 
aspect of the apex, and more slender and band-like over the 
front of the upper lobe at the level of the third, fourth, and 
fifth ribs. Sometimes the entire pleural cavity is obliterated, 
and the lung so firmly attached to the chest wall that it cannot 
be removed without tearing. A localised patch may be much 
thickened and calcified, forming a calcareous plaque. 

In some cases a variable quantity of fluid exudate is poured 
out, and the condition becomes one of pleurisy with effusion. 
The exudate is usually serofibrinous, of a clear yellow or 
slightly greenish tinge, containing floccuh of coagulated fibrin ; 
occasionally it is blood stained. Usually in tuberculous 
effusions the majority of the cells are small lymphoc 3 dies, but 
in the early stages a preponderance of polymorphonuclear 
cells may be found. Effusions which are absorbing frequently 
contain high proportions of eosinophils. Tubercle bacilli are 
seldom found by direct examination, even after centrtfugahsing 
the fluid, but culture or injection into a guinea-pig will usually 
demonstrate their presence. 

Sometimes the fluid rapidly becomes turbid and purulent 
and a tuberculous empyema results. The latter, however, is 
more often a complication of established phthisis. In many 
such cases examination of the sediment shows it to consist of 
structureless debris. Tubercle bacilli are usually present, 
while secondary infection is not uncommon. 

Dry Pleurisy 

Symptoms and Signs. — Pleurisy accompanying active 
phthisis may cause no symptoms whatever, but as a ^e there 
is a feeling of chilliness with sudden rise in the temperature 
and pulse-rate, followed by more or less dyspnoea and pain. 
The severity of the pain varies with the situation of the pleurisy. 
If it is at the apex, there will be little more than a dull ache ; 
but if it is over the more mobile portions of the lung such as 
the axillary or diaphragmatic surfaces, it may be agonising, 
and it is always aggravated by cough or deep inspiration. 



132 TUBERCULOSIS 

The characteristic physical sign is the friction sound or 
rub caused by the movement of the roughened surfaces over 
one another with respiration. The sound varies from a leathery 
creak to a fine crepitation, and the latter may be distinguished 
from sounds arising in the lung only by the observation that 
firiction accompanies expiration as well as inspiration. A rub 
may sometimes be palpable. 

In diaphragmatic pleurisy no friction is heard. The central 
portions of the diaphragm are innervated by the phrenic, 
and pleurisy of this part causes pain which is referred to the 
root of the neck and shoulder. The peripheral portions of the 
diaphragm are supplied by the lower six intercostal nerves, so 
that in this case pain is referred to the abdominal waU, and may 
simulate appendicitis, inflammation of the gall-bladder, or other 
conditions calling for laparotomy. 

Course. — After a few days the pain subsides, though it 
may recur in a mild form for years, especially during sudden 
changes of weather. The fever and cough abate after one or 
two weeks, but the friction sound may persist for months. 
Further attacks are common. 

Treatment. — If the pain is severe, the affected side must 
be strapped in such a way as to render it as nearly as possible 
immobile. Injections of morphia may also be necessary. In 
less distressing cases it will be sufficient to use counter-irritants ; 
the skin may be painted with tincture of iodine, or a warm 
cataplasm such as antiphlogistine may be applied. Cough 
should be restrained by occasional doses of the syrup of codein. 
Restful convalescence after the attack and medical observation 
subsequently are most desirable. 

Pleurisy with Effusion 

Symptoms and Signs. — In some cases the formation of the 
effusion is insidious, in others it is preceded by the signs and 
symptoms of dry pleurisy. As the fluid collects, the inflamed 
pleural surfaces become separated and the pain and the rub 
disappear. Pyrexia may be continued for many weeks with 
dyspncea as the chief symptom. 

The physical signs do not differ from those found in other 
varieties of pleural effusion. There is a striking impairment of 
mobility on the affected side, and “ flat ’’ dullness to percussion 
in the lower part of the chest. The upper limit of the dull 
area reaches its highest point in the axilla, and thence slopes 
downwards towards the midline both in front and behind. 
The level is higher over the back than over the front of the 



TUBERCULOSIS OF THE PLEURA 133 

chest. Over the dull area, tactile fremitus and voice sounds 
may be completely abolished, and the breath sounds absent or 
faintly tubular. The heart is displaced towards the unaffected 
side. If the underlying limg becomes atelectatic, bronchial 
breathing and segophony may be audible posteriorly at or 
above the level of the hilum. 

Confirmation of the presence of fluid is obtained by explora- 
tory puncture. It is wise to infiltrate the skin, tissues of the 
chest wall, and the parietal pleura with 1 per cent, novocaine. 
The fluid removed should be examined for organisms and its 
cell content. The sedimentation rate typically is very high. 

The X-ray appearance of a pleural effusion is characteristic. 
The fluid forms a dense shadow at the base, obliterating the 
outline of the diaphragm and obscuring the costophrenic angle. 
The upper border is indefinite, but can be seen to slope obliquely 
upwards and outwards. There is more or less displacement of 
the heart away from the side of the effusion. 

Course and Treatment. — If the effusion is small, the fluid 
may absorb in a few weeks, but a larger collection may persist 
for months. Bilateral effusions of this type are not uncommon. 
As a rule the pyrexia subsides before the fluid has disappeared. 
The presence of the fluid is probably beneficial, and does 
good by immobilising a diseased lung. With large effusions, 
however, the heart may be displaced to a dangerous extent 
and sudden death may result unless the excess of fluid be 
withdrawn. If there is distress or cyanosis, or if the heart 
is displaced more than 2 in., some of the fluid should be 
withdrawn in amounts determined by the relief experienced 
by the patient. Not more than a pint should be withdrawn 
at a time. Should radiological examination at this stage 
reveal an underlying tuberculous lesion it may be advisable 
to replace the fluid removed by air, and subsequently to continue 
the artificial pneumothorax. The routine air replacement of 
pleural effusions is not advised. In order to prevent undue 
fibrosis it is often wise to aspirate effusions which have persisted 
for more than six weeks. 

Even if there is no sign of disease in the lung itself, the 
case must be regarded as one of incipient phthisis, and a 
prolonged course of rest and preferably sanatorium treatment 
advised. The patient should not be allowed to resume work 
for at least six months. X-ray examinations at not longer than 
three-monthly intervals are essential, and should be continued 
for at least three years. Only in this way is the develop- 
ment of a pulmonary lesion likely to be detected in its 
early stages. 



134 


TUBERCULOSIS 


Tubercnloas Empyema. — the amount of fluid is insufficient 
to cause dyspnoea by its bulk, or if the virulence of the infection 
is insufficient to bring about severe toxaemic symptoms, the 
empyema may be left alone. In the presence, however, of either 
of these complications the fluid should be aspirated and replaced 
by air, and the pleural cavity kept dry by adequate repeated 
aspiration. The toxaemia may be diminished by instituting 
pleural washouts, at the time of aspiration, with an antiseptic 
such as Dakin’s solution. This should not be undertaken if a 
bronchopleural fistula is present. Since there is a tendency 
in these cases for sinuses to form along the tracks of insertion 
of the needles, it is as well from the beginning to abstain from 
the use of local anaesthesia and to keep clear of the area of 
chest wall needed for thoracoplasty incision. Sinuses which 
develop should be treated with promin dressings. Re-expansion 
of the underlying lung may be promoted by closed drainage 
and suction. By far the greatest improvement will result (in 
those cases where the contralateral lung is free from active 
disease) from an extensive thoracoplasty on the affected side. 
The prognosis is, however, extremely grave whatever the 
treatment. 


LARYNGEAL TUBERCULOSIS 

iEtiology. — This is a common complication of pulmonary 
tuberculosis, occurring in from 10 to 15 per cent, of sanatorium 
patients. Primary tuberculosis of the larynx is exceedingly 
rare, and pulmonary tuberculosis almost invariably precedes 
laryngeal disease. Misconceptions arise because the laryngeal 
lesion may arrest attention before signs of pulmonary disease 
become obvious. Radiological examination of the lungs is 
essential in every suspected case. Laryngeal tuberculosis occurs 
in men more than twice as frequently as in women. 

Morbid Appearances. — Tubercles form in the mucous mem- 
brane, giving rise to oedema and later to ulceration. Sometimes 
the epiglottis is chiefly affected, producing considerable swelling 
of this structure together with the mucous membrane covering 
the arytenoids and the ary-epiglottidean folds. The disease 
may attack chiefly the vocal cords, causing thickening and 
ulceration of one or both cords, commonly in the posterior half. 
In nearly every case there is swelling of the mucous membrane 
on the arytenoids, and thickening of the posterior commissure 
which runs between them. 

Symptoms. — ^When the disease attacks the epiglottis and 
entrance of the larynx, pain is the predominant symptom. 



TUBERCULOSIS OP THE ALIMENTARY TRACT 135 

It may be dreadfully severe and, being provoked by the act 
of swallowing, may lead to rapid emaciation, as the unfortxmate 
patient will not take food. Where the lesions are limited to 
the vocal cords and arytenoids, pain may be absent, and the 
only symptoms will be hoarseness or complete aphonia. 

Prognosis. — The outlook in phthisis is rendered more 
gloomy by the occurrence of tuberculous laryngitis, but it is 
by no means hopeless. 

Treatment. — Every effort must be made to deal adequately 
with the disease in the lungs, as this is the controlling factor. 
For the laryngitis, the first step is to enforce complete silence, 
the patient making aU communications by writing or by signs, 
and it may be necessary to persist with this measure for many 
months. Local treatment includes cauterisation in selected 
cases where granulations are abundant. Apart from these 
measures therapy is largely symptomatic. Inhalations of oil 
of cinnamon and creosote on a Burney-Yeo inhaler may 
alleviate the cough ; while severe dysphagia should be 
treated by spraying the larynx just before each meal with 
a 5 'pev cent, solution of cocaine, or by insufflation of 
benzocaine (anaesthesin) through a Leduc^s tube. In intract- 
able advanced cases, alcohol injection of the superior laryngeal 
nerves may be necessary. W. D. W. Brooks. 


TUBERCULOSIS OP THE ALIMENTARY TRACT 

Tongue. — ^Tuberculous ulceration occasionally occurs ; the 
ulcer is single, median, and near the tip of the tongue. There is 
usually little induration and no enlargement of l3nnphatic glands, 
but the lesion may be exceedingly painful and produce dysphagia. 
The condition is usually secondary to pulmonary tuberculosis. 

Pharynx. — ^During the terminal stages of phthisis, tuber- 
culous ulceration of the larynx and epiglottis may extend to 
the pharyngeal wall and mouth. 

Intestines. — Tuberculous ulceration of the ileum and colon 
is very common in advanced pulmonary tuberculosis, due to 
the swallowing of tubercle bacilli. It is found at autopsy in 
about 50 per cent, of patients dying of phthisis. Much less 
frequently it may occur as an apparently primary condition and 
is then often associated with tuberculosis of mesenteric glands. 

Pathology , — ^Tuberculous ulcers of the ileum originate in the 
Peyer’s patches and the solitary foUicles ; spreading round 
the lymphatic vessels they become transverse and may encircle 
the intestine. The edges of the ulcers are irregular, and the 



136 TUBERCULOSIS 

overlying peritoneum is studded with miliary tubercles. Per- 
foration very rarely occurs owing to the tendency for adhesions 
to form. The latter may produce intestinal obstruction, or 
cicatricial contraction of healing ulcers may narrow the lumen 
of the intestine. The ulcers are multiple and most numerous 
towards the lower end of the ileum. Fistula in ano is tuber- 
culous in a small proportion of oases, and its occurrence always 
renders a careful examination of the chest advisable. 

Symptoms . — Until the ulceration becomes widespread there 
may be little direct indication of intestinal involvement. 
Later there is a troublesome diarrhoea with loose watery stools 
without the presence of blood or mucus. As a rule, abdominal 
pain and tenderness are not prominent. 

Diagnosis . — The discovery of tubercle bacilli in the fseces 
does not necessarily indicate ulceration of the intestine. 
Ulcerated areas of the colon are hyper-irritable, and an X-ray 
examination may show persistent rapid emptying of the 
affected part of the gut. 

Treatment . — When the condition is advanced the outlook 
is hopeless, and only palliative measures are possible. In 
earlier stages the treatment is on similar lines to that of 
tuberculosis in other organs. 

Hypertrophic Tuberculosis of the Caecum. — This type of 
intestinal tuberculosis is extremely rare, and, unlike ordinary 
tuberculous ulceration of the intestine, tends to occur un- 
associated with tuberculosis elsewhere. The disease involves 
the caecum, the ileo-caecal sphincter, and the terminal coil 
of the ileum, and there is often enlargement and caseation of 
the neighbouring glands. The lumen of the bowel becomes 
much narrowed by infiltration of its wall, and obstructive 
symptoms may occur. A mass is palpable in the right iliac 
fossa, which may be mistaken for a growth. Exploration is 
nearly always necessary to elucidate the diagnosis, and excision 
is often very successful. Most of the cases diagnosed as hyper- 
trophic tuberculosis are probably really Crohn’s disease {vide 
P* 438). J. J, CONYBEARE. 


TUBERCULOUS PERITONITIS 

.ZBtiology. — Tuberculous peritonitis is seen chiefly in 
children and in young adults, though it may occur at any 
age. Patients with cirrhosis of the liver sometimes develop 
tuberculous peritonitis. The route of infection is often doubtful 
but usually tuberculous lesions can be found elsewhere in the 



TUBERCULOUS PERITONITIS 


137 


body. Infection probably reaches the peritoneum by way of the 
lymphatics or the blood stream. The hsematogenous origin 
accounts for the generalised miliary type, and the lymphogenous 
for the localising form of tuberculous peritonitis. 

Symptoms. — There are three main cHnical types of the 
chronic disease : (1) the ascitic ; (2) the caseous or loculated ; 
and (3) the fibroid ; these types depend in part on the method 
of infection and in part on the resistance of the patient. 

The ascitic type is common in children and adolescent 
girls. The exudate develops gradually, and though the abdomen 
may be greatly distended with fluid, the symptoms are often 
slight. The patient loses weight and strength and has a mild 
evening fever. Susceptible animals inoculated with the ascitic 
fluid develop tuberculosis. 

In the loculated type the fluid is encysted, and these collec- 
tions of exudate and the masses of tubercles with surrounding 
fibrosis may produce palpable tumours of various sizes and 
shapes. The intestines become matted together. The omen- 
tum is infiltrated with tubercles, and may often be felt lying 
transversely in the upper abdomen. Due to the interference 
with peristalsis there are many gastro-intestinal s5miptoms. 
Colicky pain, bouts of nausea and vomiting, and alternate 
obstinate constipation and diarrhoea are common. Pale, bulky 
stools containing unabsorbed lat are often a feature resulting 
from occlusion of lacteals. An evening rise of temperature, 
tachycardia, and wasting occur. The caseous nodules are apt 
to break down and become secondarily infected. Fistulae 
between various portions of the intestine or through the 
abdominal wall, especially at the umbilicus, may ultimately 
develop. 

The obliterative or chronic fibroid type is a healing process 
in which there is widespread formation of connective tissue 
and no exudate is present. The intestinal tract is bound 
down by dense adhesions, and obstructive symptoms and signs 
often result. Abdominal pain may be severe in this type, and is 
increased on movement. The patients show much emaciation 
and weakness, but usually there is no fever. 

Diagnosis. — The ascitic type is unlikely to be confused with 
cirrhosis or malignant peritonitis, as it is rarely seen except in 
children or adolescents. A large ovarian cyst may give rise to 
difficulty, especially with encysted effusions in the lower 
abdomen. A positive Mantoux test is of value in children under 
five years of age and enteric fever can be excluded by agglutina- 
tion tests. The ascitic fluid in tuberculous peritonitis has a 
specific gravity of 1,016 or over, and contains lymphocytes and 



138 TUBERCULOSIS 

often red cells. If inoculated into a guinea-pig tuberculosis 
will develop. A straight X-ray of the abdomen taken erect 
may show multiple fluid levels owing to partial obstruction of 
loops of small intestine. 

Prognosis.— On the whole the chronic ascitic does best, 
especially in children or young adults. The loculated caseous 
type has the least favourable outlook. Cases are encountered 
which run an extremely chronic course with pyrexia and 
continued ill-health over many years. 

Treatment. — The usual treatment for tuberculosis should 
be carried out — ^months of rest, fresh air, an abundant mixed 
diet, and sunshine. Heliotherapy is often most valuable, 
provided there is no active lesion elsewhere. Surgery is some- 
times necessary in dealing with complications such as intestinal 
obstruction. Repeated paracentesis may be required if large 
amounts of fluid are present. 

The constipation may be reheved by liquid paraffin or mild 
laxatives. Diarrhoea, if severe, can often be controlled by 
opium or large doses of bismuth. Fatty stools necessitate 
reduction of fat in the diet, but fat-soluble vitamins should be 
added. 

Trevor Owen. 


RENAL TUBERCULOSIS 

Very commonly in miliary tuberculosis and in chronic 
phthisis the kidneys are found to be the site of miliary tubercles 
or tuberculous nodules. These, however, have no clinical 
significance. True renal tuberculosis arises in three ways : 
(a) through the blood stream, (6) ascending infection from 
tuberculous lesions in the urinary and genital organs via the 
periureteral lymphatics, and rarely (c) from direct extension 
from neighbouring organs. Renal tuberculosis is probably 
always secondary to a primary lesion elsewhere in the body, 
and infection via the blood stream is the most common mode 
of spread to the kidneys. Males are more frequently affected 
than females in the proportion of 3 to 1, and most cases occur 
between the ages of twenty and thirty years, though it may be 
met with at all ages. Both kidneys may ultimately become 
involved, though usually one is affected before the other. 

Pathology. — ^The lesions in the kidneys resemble tuberculous 
lesions in other parts of the body and consist of tubercles which 
coalesce and then caseate. In the earliest stage the disease is 
seen to begin at the base of the pyramids, spreading thence 



RENAL TUBERCULOSIS 


139 


to involve the oalycses. The upper pole of the kidney is usually 
first affected, but the process may also begin in the lower pole. 
Caseation and ulceration may lead to abscess formation, the 
contents of which may be discharged into the pelvis and the 
whole kidney may thus become converted into a collection of 
infected cysts. The ureters are generally thickened and 
ulcerated, and the bladder, vesiculse seminales and testes are 
often infected. 

Symptoms. — The cardinal symptoms of renal tuberculosis 
are : (1) frequency, (2) pain, and (3) pyuria. Frequency is 
generally the earUest and most constant symptom and its 
importance as an aid to diagnosis cannot be over-emphasised. 
It may occur even before the bladder becomes involved and 
may be mistaken for cystitis. Pain in the form of a constant 
dull ache in the loin is also an important and early symptom. 
It is worse at night and is not relieved by rest or posture. 
Severe pain resembling that of renal colic occurs at times with 
the passage of clots of inspissated pus and debris down the 
ureter. Hsematuria is not a conspicuous symptom in most 
cases, but it may be the first sign of the disease, and in a mild 
grade is present at some stage in the course of most cases. In 
males a symptomless thin milky discharge from the urethra, 
giving rise at first to suspicion of gonorrhoea, may be the first 
sign of renal tuberculosis. It arises from irritation or infection 
of the prostate, and may be quite sterile or contain tubercle 
bacilli. Later the usual constitutional symptoms of tuberculosis 
develop. Pyrexia, wasting, anorexia, anaemia, and night sweats 
all occur. In many cases secondary invasion of the bladder 
leads to symptoms of cystitis which overshadow those due to 
the renal disease. Tenderness and a palpable mass in the loin 
usually denote a pyonephrosis. In the early stages the urine 
is abundant, of low specific gravity, and acid in reaction. The 
amount of pus present varies from a few cells to large quantities, 
which settle at the bottom of the specimen glass as a white 
layer. Tubercle bacilli are frequently present but often careful 
and repeated searches are necessary for their detection, which 
is best effected in a twenty-four hours' specimen. It is usually 
wise to confirm the diagnosis by growth on special media or 
inoculation of guinea-pigs. Tuberculous bacilluria without 
renal tuberculosis has been reported. Renal tuberculosis rarely 
heals, and treatment consists essentially in the removal of the 
kidney and ureter before the opposite side becomes involved. 
Early diagnosis, therefore, is of the utmost importance. 

Diagnosis. — ^The diagnosis has to be made from other con- 
ditions which cause frequency, pain, pyuria and hasmaturia, 



140 TUBERCULOSIS 

such as nephrolithiasis, cystitis, pyelitis, pyonephrosis, vertebral 
disease, enuresis, nephritis, essential hsematuria, and malignant 
disease. The discovery of a tuberculous lesion elsewhere, either 
in the lungs or the lower genito-urinary tract, is of significance. 
Cystoscopic examination should never be omitted as the finding 
of the characteristic puckering and retraction of the ureteric 
orifice on the affected side is diagnostic. Since a positive 
diagnosis usually leads to removal of the affected kidney and 
ureter, it is important that the renal function of the unaffected 
kidney be carefully estimated. 

Treatment. — ^When one kidney has been removed for tuber- 
culous disease, much may be done to prevent the remaining 
organ from becoming involved. Plenty of fresh air, good food, 
and adequate rest are essential. The mode of life should be 
that prescribed for quiescent cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. 
In inoperable cases with much pain and incessant frequency 
it is not generally recognised that strict and absolute rest in 
bed of the type enforced in active pulmonary tuberculosis will 
often give prolonged relief from intolerable distress. Tuberculin 
is often prescribed in renal tuberculosis, but its value has not 
been proved. 

A. A. Osman. 


TUBERCULOUS DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

This large and important group is naturally divided into 
two parts : the first is concerned with diseases caused by 
the multiplication of tubercle bacilli in the skin, the second 
with a series of exanthemative eruptions which are an expression 
of active tuberculous disease elsewhere. 

The first group, progressive tuberculosis of the skin, includes 
five conditions: (1) The primary complex; (2) tuberculous 
ulceration of the skin ; (3) tuberculosis coUiquitiva ; (4) ver- 
rucous tuberculosis ; (5) lupus vulgaris. 

Pbogressive Tuberculosis of the Skin 

The Primary Complex in the Skin.— This is seen only in 
those who have not been previously infected with tuber- 
culosis ; naturally it occurs most often in children, though not 
always. 

The initial lesion is a papule or small nodule which quickly 
becomes dimpled or ulcerated owing to necrosis in its centre ; 
it bears quite a close resemblance to a syphilitic chancre, and 



TUBERCULOUS DISEASES OF THE SKIN 141 

it is always accompanied by regional adenitis ; sometimes the 
regional gland becomes grossly enlarged within a few weeks, 
and it often eventually breaks down. This phase is sometimes 
accompanied by erythema nodosum. 

In the course of months the primary sore either disappears 
spontaneously or it becomes a small patch of lupus vulgaris. 
There is not, however, the tendency to peripheral extension 
that is usual in lupus, and spontaneous resolution, both of the 
sore and of the adenitis, is not uncommon. 

Tuberculous Ulceration {Tuberculosis Cutis Orificialis ), — 
This condition is met with only in those with rapidly advancing 
internal tuberculosis, especially phthisis, and as an extension 
of this process. It is most often situated on the lips, and some- 
times about the anus and genital organs. It begins in the form 
of miliary tubercles which rapidly undergo caseation and 
ulceration. The idcer is soft and is usually covered with a 
crust, which when removed reveals a reddish-yellow floor 
exuding thin sero-purulent matter. As a rule there is httle 
pain. There is gradual extension with little tendency to 
healing. 

Tuberculosis Colliquitiva {Scrofulodermia, tuberculous gumma), 
— These rather uncommon lesions begin as sluggish hypodermic 
nodes which become adherent to the skin within a few days and 
develop a deep red or reddish-purple tint ; softening com- 
mences in the superficial part of the lesion, which generally 
breaks down within two or three weeks and evacuates serous 
or sero-purulent matter, often intermingled with blood. This 
may continue to discharge for weeks or months, either through 
one or several fistulous openings, or an open ulcer may be 
formed with an irregular undermined margin. Spontaneous 
cure is, however, usual, and it is not uncommon to find the 
scars of old lesions, often adherent to underlying tissues. 
Tuberculous gummata occasionally arise as a direct extension 
from underlying bone, joint or glandular disease, or they may, 
on the other hand, give rise to disease of underlying tissues 
such as tendon sheaths. They are often found over prominences, 
such as wrists, metacarpo-pWangeal joints, maUeoli, the fore- 
head, scalp, and the neck, but they may occur anywhere. They 
are seen chiefly in infants, young children, and in adolescents. 
They are always an expression of tuberculosis elsewhere, 
sometimes visceral, sometimes of the bones, joints, or superficial 
glands. 

Diagnosis. — The lesions are often mistaken for furuncular 
abscesses and sometimes for tertiary syphilis, but their indolent 
course, bluish tint, characteristic type of ulceration, or fistulous 



142 TUBERCULOSIS 

openings and tracts, together with the fact that underlying 
bone or joint tissue may be affected in connection with one or 
more of them, serves to simplify the diagnosis. Tubercle 
bacilli can often be found by culture or direct examination of 
material withdrawn fk>m an unbroken abscess. On the face 
in infants they are sometimes, on account of their bluish colour, 
mistaken for cavernous naevi. 

Tuberculosis Verrucosis Cutis (Verrtica Necrogenica ). — 
Generally situated on the hand, fingers, or thumb, with a 
predilection for the radial margin, occasionally about the anus, 
the lesion is an infiltrated plaque, surmounted by warty ex- 
crescences and surrounded by a red or violaceous zone. 
Droplets of pus can sometimes be expressed. At first a papule, 
it very slowly extends peripherally to form a disc-shaped 
plaque. In tMs stage it presents three zones : a peripheral red 
or violaceous areola, an intermediate infiltrated zone sur- 
mounted by warty projections, and a central warty area which 
has undergone partial cicatrisation. 

The cause is direct inoculation of the tubercle bacillus into 
the skin, a fact which explains the predUeotion of the disease 
for the hands. It may occur, however, on other parts, such 
as the wrist, elbows, feet, knees, and face, and in phthisical 
subjects the perianal region. The name verruca necrogenica 
was given to the disease because it formerly occurred with 
some frequency among post-mortem workers. 

Lupus Vulgaris. — The primary lesion of lupus is an intra- 
dermal nodule from the size of a pin’s head to that of a small 
pea, flat or slightly raised above the surface. It is reddish-yellow 
in colour, and on vitro-pressure appears as a brownish-yellow 
opalescent spot. The surface may be smooth, covered with 
scales or crust, or it may be ulcerated. Though firm to touch, 
its consistency is in reality rather soft. A patch of lupus 
enlarges by the appearance of other lupus nodules in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the initial lesion. The natural 
tendency is towards very gradual peripheral extension accom- 
panied by more or less cicatrisation of the older part of the 
lesion, and sometimes by ulceration. The sclerosis destroys 
by strangulation some of the older lupus nodules, but fre^ 
nodules often appear in the scar tissue, a point which serves 
to distinguish lupus from serpiginous tertiary syphilis of the 
skin, in which fresh lesions are rarely found in soar tissue. 

The sites of election of lupus are the face, particularly about 
the nose and cheeks, and the neck, but the disease is often 
found on the trunk and limbs, very rarely on the palms, soles, 
or the scalp. A single patch is rather more common than 



TUBERCULOUS DISEASES OF THE SKIN 143 


multiple patches. There are many clinical varieties of lupus 
which have received descriptive names. 

Disseminate Lupus, — ^The lesions are multiple and scattered 
over different parts of the body. 

Agminate Lupus. — ^The common type, in which the disease 
forms a plaque spreading centrifugally by the formation of 
fresh nodules and cicatrising in the centre. 

Erythematoid Lupus, — A very superficial variety. The 
lupus nodules are very small and sometimes difficult to see. 
They are situated on a reddened, superficially cicatrised skin, 
and sometimes occupy the nose and cheek. In this situation 
they are often mistaken for lupus erythematosus. 

Elephantiasic Lupus. — This variety occurs especially on the 
limbs, but may also occur on the face, where it gives rise 
especially to elephantiasic thickening of the upper lip. The 
affected region is swollen as the result of invasion of the 
lymphatics. 

Lupus Exedens, — This term is applied to a rapidly advancing 
form of lupus always accompanied by ulceration and sometimes 
by severe mutilation of the affected parts. 

Lupus tumidus^ lupus hypertrophicuSy squamous lupus are 
terms that explain themselves. More than one of these clinical 
types may commonly be foimd on the same patient or in 
dffierent parts of a single patch of lupus. 

JEtiology, — Lupus can begin at any age, but is principally 
a disease of childhood, becoming less common towards 
adolescence and rather rare after thirty. It is very rare in 
phthisical subjects, though phthisis may develop as a terminal 
event. Tuberculous adenitis is, however, rather common. 
Lupus may be a direct infection of the skin, but it more often 
originates by spread along the lymphatics from infected mucous 
membranes or lymphatic glands. The disseminated type often 
follows measles ; it is no doubt in this case a blood-borne 
infection. The nasal or buccal mucous membrane is often 
primarily infected, which explains the frequent occurrence of 
the condition on the face or nose. Lupus of the nasal foss^ 
may give rise to epiphora by blockage of the lachrymal duct. 
The eyelids are also sometimes attack^ by lupus as an extension 
of the disease from this source. Lupus of the mucosa of the 
mouth, palate, or gums occurs in the form of large or small 
bud-like granulations, producing by confluence a mamillated 
or, by cicatrisation, a reticular appearance, or it may ulcerate 
in parts. 

Evolutiati and CompliccUions, — Untreated lupus always 
lasts indefinitely. Its mode of progression is by way of the 



144 TUBERCULOSIS 

lymphatic channels in the corium. During its course certain 
complications are common, and of these the most important 
are elephantiasis of a limb or of the lips, pulmonary tuberculosis, 
erysipelas, and epithelioma. This last serious complication is 
sometimes the result of the treatment of lupus by X-ray, but 
it has frequently occurred on scarred lupus which has not been 
so treated. 

Treatment . — Lupus is an extremely difficult disease to cure ; 
its treatment has, however, made important strides in recent 
years. Though hope of effecting a complete cure in very 
severe and extensive cases must be abandoned, excellent results 
may be obtained in all cases limited to a few small patches 
and in many of moderate extent. Treatment must be both 
general and local. Following the brilliant results of helio- 
therapy obtained by RoUier in Switzerland, institutions for 
similar treatment have been established in other countries. 
Treatment by graduated sun baths has proved the most effective 
method of combating the disease. In England and in the 
northern continental coimtries, where natural sunlight is only 
available in summer, heliotherapy has been supplemented by 
graduated exposures to artificial sources of ultra-violet light. 
This is of very great value, but is, however, considerably less 
effective than natural sunlight. The latter, aided by the added 
stimulus of the open air, gives rise to a considerable increase in 
metabolism, an effect which is absent in lamp treatment of 
any kind. Of the various types of lamp, the carbon arc has 
proved itself the most useful. 

Local Treatment . — When complete surgical excision is not 
advisable, much may be effected by local treatment with 
concentrated ultra-violet light, or diathermy. Good results 
can only be obtained with phototherapy by experts working 
with satisfactory equipment, such as Finsen or Finsen-Lomholt 
lamps. Details must be sought in textbooks on dermatology. 

Selective caustics, such as liquid acid nitrate of mercury 
for the skin and zinc chloride for mucous membranes, may be 
applied locally in addition to general heliotherapy. 

The injection of the ethyl ester of hydrocarpic acid (Eulykol) 
directly into the lupus nodules is a valuable remedy in some of 
the cases in which the disease is limited to one or more small 
foci. It appears to be effective when it is followed by consider- 
able local swelling, the appearance of the lesion suggesting a 
marked increase of the tuberculous process. The swelling is 
however absorbed in the course of several weeks, and with it 
sometimes the tuberculous tissue. The cosmetic result is 
exceUent. 



TUBERCULOUS DISEASES OE THE SKIN 145 

Prognosis, — Well-treated lupus has a satisfactory prognosis 
if diagnosed early. The very extensive and mutilating cases, 
and particularly those accompanied by elephantiasis, are, 
however, incurable ; all patients must be kept under observation 
for years even after apparent cure. 


Exanthematio Tuberculous Eruptions 

These consist of — 

1. Miliary tuberculosis of the skin. 

2. The tuberculides. 

3. Sarcoid of Boeck (lupoid of Boeck, miliary lupoid, 

Lymphogranuloma benignumof Schaumann, Lupus 
pernio). 

The greater number of these eruptions belong to a group 
named by Darier “ Tuberculides.'' They are a series of 
cutaneous and subcutaneous eruptions related to central 
tuberculosis. They differ from the progressive forms of tuber- 
culosis of the skin in having a wider and usually symmetrical 
distribution, and the individual lesion has a definite tendency 
to spontaneous cure. They may exist in combination with 
easily recognisable tuberculous disease elsewhere, or the 
eruption may be the only obvious evidence of infection. It is 
probable that emboli derived from a central focus become 
lodged in the skin and stimulate a reaction, papule, nodule 
or subcutaneous node, which results in the destruction of the 
bacillus. In general the tuberculides occur in those whose 
resistance to the infection is high, and the prognosis is usually 
though not invariably good. 

They may be classified as follows : — 

1. Lichen scrofulosorum. 

2. Papulonecrotic tuberculide, including acne scrofulo- 

sorum. 

3. Miliary lupus (acne agminata, acnitis). 

4. Bazin’s erythema induratum. 

Erythema Induratum . — Of the tuberculides, Bazin’s disease 
is met with considerably more often than any of the other types. 
It is seen almost exclusively in adolescent and yoimg adult 
females with sluggish peripheral circulation. The lesions are 
found mainly on the posterior and outer aspects of the lower 
two-thirds of the legs. They begin as firm subcutaneous nodes, 
which in the course of a few weeks involve the skin and become 


10 



146 TUBERCULOSIS 

red or blue in colour. Some of them soften and open on the sur- 
face, discharging thin sanious material or forming an ulcer •which 
heals slowly ; others are absorbed. Individual lesions tend to 
gradual spontaneous ciure, but they are succeeded by others. 
Cold weather aggravates the condition, but it does not dis- 
appear altogether in summer. It' is sometimes accompanied 
by the papulo-necrotic tuberculide elsewhere, notably the 
fingers, hands, and elbows. 

A nutritious diet, rich in -vitamins, combined with carbon 
arc lamp or helio-therapy is the treatment of choice. Treatment 
by neoarsphenamine has also proved to be valuable in a number 
of cases. The legs should be kept as warm as possible by thick 
stockings and high boots lined with wool. Exceptionally a 
period of rest in bed is necessary. 

For descriptions of other types of tuberculide, miliary 
tuberculosis of the skin, and sarcoid of Boeck, the reader is 
referred to works on dermatology. 

G. B. Dowltno. 



VENEREAL DISEASES 


OONOBBHCEA 

G ONORRHCEA is an inflammatory disease of the mucous 
membrane of the genito-urinary passages, due to infection 
by the gonococcus, which may extend locally to the 
genital glands and may cause systemic complications. 

It is a widespread condition affecting both sexes. Although 
almost invariably contracted during coitus, infection from 
closets, articles of toilet, clothing and towels is possible and is 
not uncommon in female infants. The incubation period varies 
from three to ten days. 

The gonococcus is a minute, gram-negative, kidney-shaped 
diplococcus, which is cultivated with difficulty. In recent 
infections the gonococci are plentiful and are found in clusters 
within the pus cells and in scattered pairs between the cells. 
Outside the tissues it dies rapidly when dried, but if moist and 
warm it may live for several days. 

The parts affected in the male are primarily the urethra, 
from which the infection frequently spreads to the epididymes, 
prostate gland, and seminal vesicles. 

In the female the initial infection involves the urethra and 
cervix ; later the uterus and Fallopian tubes may be affected. 
The vulva, lower vagina, urethra, and rectum are liable to be 
infected in female infants, 

Gonorrhcea in the Male. — The initial symptom is a 
slight irritation or scalding during micturition, soon followed 
by a purulent discharge. The hps of the urinary meatus are 
tender, swollen, and everted. The urethral mucous membrane 
is cedematous, injected, and bathed in pus ; the glands of 
Littr6 and the lacunae are infected ; periurethral swellings and 
abscesses may result which sometimes rupture externally on 
the imder surface of the penis or in the perinaeum. Inguinal 
adenitis is common, though suppuration is rare. 

After several weeks the acute inflammation subsides, but 
a condition of intermittent urethral discharge, known as gleet, 

147 



148 


VENEREAL DISEASES 


becomes established, and the urine contains yellow opaque 
threads which contain gonococci. This stage may last from 
a few weeks to many months, being usually dependent on a 
chronic infection of the glands of Littr6 or of the lacunce — 
lesions which can be identified by means of a urethroscope. 
This chronic infection frequently results in subepithelial in- 
filtration which, if marked, forms a soft or inflammatory 
stricture : years later a hard fibrous stricture may follow. 

The infection, if untreated, often spreads to the posterior 
urethra in the second to the fourth week. The onset is frequently 
insidious, but may be acute and cause frequency of micturition 
with pain, slight fever, general malaise, and haematuria. When 
there is acute infection of the prostate gland a large, hot, 
tender swelling, in which the seminal vesicles may participate, 
can be felt per rectum. Constant perineal pain and dysuria 
are usual, but pain on defaecation is slight. Intention of urine 
is a common accompaniment. True abscess formation is rare. 
This usually ruptures into the urethra or occasionally into the 
rectum with immediate relief ; subsequent gonococcal proctitis 
is rare. When rupture is delayed malaise, toxaemia, and fever 
are marked ; rigors are not infrequent, and the condition may 
simulate malaria or endocarditis. 

Chronic prostatitis and vesiculitis may produce a persistent 
urethral discharge. More often repeated relapses occur over 
many years and may cause arthritis and iritis. On rectal 
examination enlargement and nodules may be recognised. 
The condition is frequently intractable partly on account of 
the inadequate drainage but chiefly because of the absence of 
characteristic locaUsing signs or symptoms. In many instances 
the diagnosis can be made only by the detection of pus and 
bacteria in the prostatic secretion or semen. A urethral 
discharge experienced only on defaecation is suggestive of such 
infection. Secondary invasion with pyogenic or coliform 
bacteria is a constant feature. Gonococci are rarely found 
after the first few months. 

Gonococcal infection of the epididymis is a frequent com- 
plication ; an acute tender swelling appears in the scrotum, 
formed chiefly by the lower pole of the epididymis. Suppura- 
tion, however, rarely occurs. Hard nodules may persist in the 
epidid 3 nnis for months, and sterility is frequent after bilateral 
infection. 

Treatment. — General measures consist of rest in bed and 
the avoidance of alcoholic drinks and condiments ; alkaline 
mixtures should be prescribed and plenty of bland fluids 
taken. 



GONORRHOEA 


149 


The principal treatment of gonorrhoea is with sulphonamide 
compounds. Sulphathiazole, sulphadiazine or sulphapyridine 
effect a speedy cure in about 80 per cent, of recent imcomplicated 
infections. Of these sulphathiazole appears to be the most 
effective. In ambulant patients 1 grm. is given at intervals 
of six hours for five days. Bland fluids should be taken freely 
during and for two days after treatment. The drug should 
be given as soon as gonococci have been identified and should 
not be employed until there is bacteriological confirmation. 
The discharge fi-equently disappears within two days, but the 
premature cessation of chemotherapy at this stage will almost 
invariably be followed by a relapse. Underdosage in the first 
few days of treatment is a common cause of failure and many 
undertreated cases prove refractory to further increased dosage. 
Failure of response to treatment or relapse is treated with a 
second course using a different sulphonamide. Refractory 
cases may respond to intravenous injections of sodium sulpha- 
thiazole. Recent reports on the use of penicillin in these cases 
are extremely favourable. 

Local treatment is useful, particularly in sulphonamide- 
resistant cases and in chronic infections ; irrigation of the 
anterior urethra for the first ten days and then of the whole 
urethra and bladder should be carried out twice daily by the 
gravity method with -potassium permanganate 1 in 8,000, or 
flavine 1 in 8,000. Acute prostatitis or vesiculitis requires rest 
in bed with rectal douches of hot saline ; pain and frequency of 
micturition may be relieved by 20 minims of Tr. Hyoscyami 
orally, or if severe will require rectal suppositories of morphia 
and atropine ; kaolin poultices or lotio plumbi c opio will 
relieve the pain in acute epididymitis. 

Chronic urethritis in the male may persist for many months 
or there may be temporary improvement followed by a relapse. 
In most of the refractory cases there is a chronic infection of 
some of the glands of Littr6 or a lacuna. When there is marked 
peri-glandular inflammation a soft stricture which gives no 
signs of obstruction frequently ensues. These are treated by 
repeated instrumental dilatation and irrigation of the urethra 
for many weeks. 

The treatment of chronic prostatitis and seminal vesiculitis 
consists of measures directed to improve drainage such as 
regular prostatic and vesicular massage, rectal diathermy, 
and urethro-vesical irrigations with pot. permang., flavine, or 
mercury oxycyanide in a 1 in 8,000 solution. Chemotherapy 
with siilphonamides is most useful in chronic gonorrhoea when 
drainage has been re-established. Vaccine therapy, particularly 



160 VENEREAL DISEASES 

with an autogenous vaccine of the mixed bacterial flora, is also 
beneficial. 

Stringent tests are required before a case is to be con- 
sidered cured. These include the absence of urethral discharge 
for eight weeks and the urine should be free from pus cells 
and gonococci after the cessation of treatment and after pro- 
vocative measures such as alcoholic drinks, hard exercise, the 
injection of a large dose of a gonococcal vaccine, prostatic 
massage and the dilatation of the urethra with a metal bougie. 
The prostatic fluid, and the semen if obtainable, should be 
free from pus cells and gonococci on direct films and on culture. 
The gonococcal complement fixation reaction should be negative. 

Gonokbhcea in the Female. — The sites of infection in the 
female are the urethra, vulva, and cervix, and in most cases 
all these are involved. The symptoms are vaginal discharge, 
painful and frequent micturition, and swelling of the labia. 
The urinary meatus becomes red, swollen, and everted ; pus 
can be expressed from the urethra by digital pressure along the 
anterior wall of the vagina. Chronic urethritis is frequently 
due to the infection of minute ducts near the orifice (Skene’s 
ducts). Further extension of infection results in gonococcal 
cystitis and rarely in pyehtis. 

Acute infection of the cervix results in a swollen injected os, 
from which thick tenacious yellow pus issues, and the vaginal 
walls are bathed in pus ; in the chronic stage erosions of the 
cervix are frequent. Bartholin’s ducts and glands are frequently 
infected. Further extension of infection is followed by 
endometritis and salpingitis. Localised peritonitis of plastic 
type is a frequent accompaniment, but general spreading 
peritonitis is rare. 

The rectum may be occasionally infected by the vaginal 
discharge, and unless giving rise to prominent symptoms, 
this is often overlooked. Gonococcal infection may become 
chronic in the urethra or cervix, producing few or no clinical 
signs, and may cause gonorrhoeal iritis and artliritis. Tricho- 
monas vaginalis infestation may coexist with gonorrlicea or 
may produce a similar discharge. This condition is treated 
by vaginal pessaries containing ac^tarsol. Two of these are 
inserted at night for seven consecutive nights. 

Female children, especially infants, are particularly liable 
to become infected from bed-clothes or towels. The infection 
produces a vulvo -vaginitis in which the vulva, hymen, and 
lower vagina are affected. In the acute stages there is much 
swelling, pain, and purulent discharge. The urethra and rectum 
are fi^equently infected. Extension to the uterus or Fallopian 



GONORRHCEA 161 

tubes and localised peritonitis are rare. Joint lesions or iritis 
are very rare. 

Treatment. — General measures are similar to those for 
men. In a^cute vulvitis and acute endocervicitis treatment 
with hot sitz>baths is advisable and rest in bed essential. In 
subacute and chronic conditions the cervix and urethra are 
treated by applications of various antiseptic solutions, c.g., 
silver proteinate 6 to 10 per cent. Soluble pessaries for the 
urethra as well as the cervix are frequently used containing 
silver proteinate, flavine or ichthyol, and glycerin. 

When the acute stage is subsiding vaginal douches of warm 
solutions of chloramine-T (1 in 5,000) or potass, permanganate 
(1 in 8,000) are of value but only when given by a nurse or a 
very intelligent patient. Irrigation of the urethra as in the 
male is also employed. 

Acute salpingitis which is indicated by p3rrexia and pain 
in the lower abdomen associated with an enlarged and tender 
Fallopian tube is best treated by rest in bed in the Fowler 
position, radiant heat or hot fomentations and frequenjb hot 
vaginal douches. The development of pyosalpinx or general 
peritonitis may require surgical intervention. 

Sulphonamide compounds are of use in all stages. Gono- 
coccal vaccines are sometimes beneficial in the chronic stages. 

Relapses after apparent recovery are common, especially 
when stringent tests for cure have been omitted. These should 
include the gonococcal complement fixation reaction and 
repeated microscopic examinations and cultures of the secretions 
of the urethra and cervix, especially following menstruation. 

In many cases the vulvo-vaginitis in children is cured 
with sulphathiazole or sulphapyridine (0*25 grm. daily for four 
days). 

Gonorrhoeal Ophthalmia and Ophthalmia Neonatorum. — 

Infection of the conjunctiva is caused by accidental trans- 
ference of gonococcal pus into the eye and is frequent during 
transit of the new-born child through infected maternal passages. 
An acute purulent inflammation results, often with destructive 
ulceration of the cornea and, finally, blindness. Excellent results 
have followed the use of sulphapyridine. One per cent, silver 
nitrate solution is a successful prophylactic measure. 

Metastatic Gonococcal Infection 

Septio8Bmia is rare. When this occurs there is hectic fever, 
with enlargement of the spleen and purpuric rashes. Gonococci 
may sometimes be cultivated from the blood and the spleen. 



162 VENEREAL DISEASES 

Acute bacterial endocarditis and pericarditis are almost in- 
variably fatal. 

Gonococcal iritis and irido-cyclitis occur in chronic gonor- 
rhoea and are usually associated with chronic disease of the 
prostate or seminal vesicles in the male, and cervicitis or 
salpingitis in the female. Both eyes tend to be affected 
successively, and recurrences are frequent. Arthritis is often 
present in these cases. 

Gonorrhosal Rheumatism. — The gonococcus shows a special 
tendency to attack the joints, tendon sheaths, and bursae. 
Such irdections occur during the acute or chronic stage of 
gonorrhoea in about 5 per cent, of cases. In the chronic 
stage there may be no symptoms of local infection, but 
thorough examination wUl reveal a focus in the genito-urinary 
passages. 

In acute arthritis, which rarely ensues before the third week 
of the disease, the onset is sudden with marked swelling of the 
joint chiefly affecting the peri-articular structures ; effusion 
into the joint cavity is usually small in amount. There is 
considerable constitutional disturbance and the patient is 
feverish and sleepless from pain and tenderness. Considerable 
and sometimes rapid wasting of the adjacent muscles may take 
place. When the swelling subsides and in the subacute variety 
associated with chronic gonorrhoea, the plastic inflammation 
involving the peri-articular structures frequently causes fibrous 
ankylosis. Acute arthritis is often limited to one large joint 
such as the knee or wrist, but cases of acute polyarthritis are 
met with in which several large joints are affected, together with 
the joints of the carpus or tarsus and interphalangeal joints. 
Infections of the temporo-mandibular or stemo-clavicular 
joints are not particularly common in gonorrhoea, but they 
rarely suffer acutely in any other infection. Spondylitis is 
occasionally of gonococcal origin. 

Gonorrhoeal rheumatism may be limited to fleeting joint 
pains without physical signs, and also occasionally causes a 
chronic hydrops of one large articulation, such as the knee, 
which may persist for many years. The tendo Achillis with 
its underlying bursa may become inflamed also the plantar 
fascia resulting in a painful flat foot or painful heel. 

Treatment — ^Attention to the local focus of disease in the 
genito-urinary tract is essential. Considerable benefit may 
follow the administration of sulphonamide compounds. 

In the acute stage when pain in the joint is marked splints 
may be required but on account of the tendency to ankylosis 
early movement should be encouraged. Local application of 



LYMPHOGRANULOMA INGUINALE 


153 


radiant heat or kaolin poultice is beneficial. In subacute 
arthritis fever therapy is often followed by improvement. 
In the more chronic stage the arthritis may respond to a 
gonococcal vaccine. Prolonged treatment by massage and 
exercises is essential for complete recovery. Pyarthrosis is rare 
and requires surgical intervention. 


LYMPHOGRANULOMA INGUINALE 

Lymphogranuloma inguinale or Climatic Bubo is a specific 
virus disease involving the inguinal glands and characterised 
by chronic suppuration with multiple sinuses. The infection, 
which is of venereal origin, is frequent in tropical areas but 
uncommon in Europe. 

The transient primary lesion appears as a minute erosion or 
papule, usually situated in the coronary sulcus of the penis 
within two weeks after coitus. Two to three weeks later a 
painless swelling of the inguinal glands appears in one or both 
groins. The rate of development of the bubo is variable. 

In the earlier stages of the adenitis the overlying skin 
assumes a bluish-violet tint and becomes adherent to the 
glands ; the surroimding tissues become infiltrated and hard. 
Multiple points of suppuration occur and discharge yellow 
tenacious pus. There also may be swelling of the iliac 
glands. 

The general symptoms, which are variable, include fever, 
pains in the limbs, loss of weight and general prostration. 
Severe headache may occur with transient meningismus. 

The systemic symptoms last a short time, but the bubo 
usually forms slowly and the resultant sinuses may drain for 
months. 

In women proctitis is frequent, and a rectal stricture may be 
present in long-standing cases. 

Elephantiasis vulvae may follow if the lymphatic channels 
be extensively obstructed. The typical inguinal adenitis seen 
in the male is uncommon in women. 

The intracutaneous reaction of Frei becomes positive in 
almost all cases of lymphogranuloma inguinale in two to three 
weeks and may persist for many years after recovery. 

Treatment , — Excellent results in the early stages have 
followed the use of oral sulphanilamide and sulphapyridine. 
In the later stages response is slow and several courses of 
treatment may be needed. Local aspiration or partial excision 
of the bubo is occasionaUy required but is best avoided. 



154 


VENEREAL DISEASES 


SYPHILIS 

Syphilis, or lues, is a chronic infective disease due to the 
entrance into the body of a specific protozoon — the Spirochasta 
pallida { Treponema pallidum). 

The duration of the disease is long ; it may affect all organs 
and tissues of the body, and manifestations may appear at 
intervals, over many years, interspaced with periods of latency. 
Its natural occurrence is Hmited to the human race, but it can 
be transmitted experimentally to apes and rabbits. 

Congenital syphilis is due to the infection of a child by the 
transmission of the disease from the mother during pregnancy. 

The clinical course of the acquired infection has been divided 
into three stages which are separated by intervals. The stage 
of the initial lesion is known as the primary stage, that of 
generalised tissue reaction as secondary syphilis, and that of 
the later recrudescences as tertiary syphilis. 

iEtiology. — Syphilis is due to infection of the tissues with 
the Spirochceta pallida, a protozoon discovered by Schaudinn 
and Hoffmann in 1905. This organism is slender, motile, and 
of varydng length, 5 to 25 /x, and about 0-25 p in width. The 
spirals are regular, closely tw'isted, and vary from ten to thirty 
in number. Its movements of progression are slow, but those 
of rotation and of bending are rapid. Exposure to heat or 
absence of moisture is soon followed by the death of the 
organism. 

From the lesions of the primary and secondary stage the 
Spirochceta pallida is readily isolated, but in the tertiary lesions 
they can be found only with diflSculty. In congenital syphilis 
spirochaetes are often present in enormous numbers in the 
viscera, such as the liver, spleen, and suprarenale. 


ACQUIRED SYPHILIS 

Mode of Infection. — Infection usually occurs through 
some minute abrasion on the genital organs during sexual inter- 
course with an infected person in whom there is an active 
syphilitic lesion, or spirochaetes may be present in the seminal 
fluid or vaginal secretion of infected persons. At the site of 
inoculation, after an interval of about a month, a lesion known 
as the primary chancre appears. 

Contact with infective material may result in extra-genital 
chancre, e.g., lip, mouth, finger, or nipple. Generalised 



ACQUIRED SYPHILIS 165 

secondary syphilis, without any primary lesion, has followed 
blood trans^ion from syphilitic donors. 

The infectivity of syphilitic lesions varies considerably, 
being most marked in the secretion from the chancre and 
from the moist lesions of the secondary stage. In the tertiary 
lesions the infectivity is decidedly less. 

The Pbimaby Stage. — ^The inoculation by the infecting 
organism is followed, after an interval usually of about a 
month, by the development of a sy^philitic chancre at the site 
of inoculation. The initial lesion is a minute papule which 
within a few days becomes eroded and gradually indurated 
at its base ; at the end of a week or so a typical hard syphihtic 
chancre is present. This lesion is a small painless indolent 
oval or round sore with a firm button-like indurated base and 
sloping borders ; it is raw ham in colour, and is covered with 
a serous discharge. Many variations from the typical hard 
chancre are met with, but in all of them some degree of in- 
duration is present, although it is much less evident in lesions 
in the female sex. 

In the secretion from the deeper parts of the primary sore 
spirochaetes are readily found on dark-ground microscopy. 

Syphilitic chancres are usually solitary, but may be multiple. 
In men, the most common sites are the prepuce, the glans 
penis, and the fraenum. A chancre or a soft sore may be 
concealed by phimosis, but the former can be felt through the 
oedematous prepuce. Multiple S3rphilitic fissures on the preputial 
margin are not infrequent ; these, like the uncommon meatal 
chancre, are usually painful. 

In the female chancres occur on the labia, wliich may be 
much swollen, on the clitoris, the urinary meatus, the fourchette, 
and the cervix. 

Shortly after the appearance of a genital chancre the 
inguinal glands imdergo a hard discrete painless enlargement. 
A similar enlargement of the posterior cervical, epitroclilear, 
and axillary glands soon follows. 

The invasion of the blood stream by spii'ochaetes takes place 
during the incubation period, and has already occurred before 
the chancre appears ; thus excision of the primary chancre 
cannot prevent general dissemination of the disease. 

In the untreated chancre the induration gradually subsides 
within about two months, and may leave only a minute and 
superficial scar. At the time of the appearance of the chancre, 
the Wassermann reaction is negative, and remains so until 
two to three weeks have elapsed. 

Various sores other than syphilitic chancres are met with 



166 VENEREAL DISEASES 

on the genitalia. Infection with Ducrey’s etrepto-bacillus, 
resulting within a few days in one or more chancroid ulcers 
(soft sores), is common in tropical countries but inficequent 
in Britain except in seaports ; they are rare in women. 
Chancroid ulcers are characterised by their irregular deep 
ulceration, imdermined edge, sloughy floor, and tenderness. 
The ulcer feels soft until healing is well advanced. Although 
chancroid produces no constitutional effects, swelling of the 
inguinal glands is a common feature. The swollen glands 
gradually become adherent to each other and to the skin 
forming a red painful swelling in one or both groins. Syphilitic 
glands rarely become matted and suppuration is exceptional, 
whereas in the chancroid bubo both are frequent. 

The infection responds well to sulphapyridine and often to 
a vaccine of Ducrey’s bacillus, neither of which improve a 
syphilitic chancre. 

Simple erosions in the genital area may be caused by 
balanitis, scabies, or herpes genitalis. Carcinoma of the penis 
is often mistaken for a chancre. 

The Secondary Stage. — Within four to six weeks of 
the appearance of the primary sore, the stage of general 
tissue reaction known as secondary syphilis, becomes manifest. 
Constitutional disturbances such as slight fever, loss of appetite, 
headache, malaise, alopecia, and pains in bones and joints may 
occur, and anaemia may be severe. 

Cutaneous Eruptions. — The main characteristics are sym- 
metrical distribution, polymorphism, a lilac or ham colour, 
and lack of irritation. The tyjyen commonly met with may be 
classified as follows : — 

1. A Roseolar Eruption is the earliest and most frequent 
type, consisting of numerous pale rose or lilac macules on the 
trunk and flexor surfaces. There is a superficial resemblance 
to the eruption of measles, and when the rash fades it leaves a 
reddish-brown stain on the skin, which may persist for some 
time. The roseolar rash must be distinguished from other 
erythemata, pityriasis rosea, and drug rashes. 

2. Papular Eruptions which follow on the roseolar rash may 
be of the lenticular or follicular varieties. In the lenticular 
t;i^ the papules var>' in size from a pinhead to a threepenny 
piece, are of round or oval contour, and of a reddish-brown 
colour. Although more scattered, their distribution is similar 
to that of the roseolar rash. On the forehead they are termed 
the corona veneris. In dry localities the papules become scaly 
and may resemble psoriasis. 

3. Condylomaia . — In moist situations, such as the perineum 



157 


ACQUIRED SYPHILIS 

and axillae, the papules are more profuse in growth, and become 
sodden ; these are known as condylomata, the moist surfaces 
of which are usually teeming with spirochsetes. When situated 
near the anus they are frequently mistaken for haemorrhoids. 

4. Bupia . — In debilitated patients infection of some of the 
papules with pyogenic micro-organisms may occur, and the 
surface becomes covered with a dark crust imder which a 
shallow ulcer soon forms. Dried layers of pus add to the crust 
forming a limpet-shaped scab known as syphilitic rupia. 

5. Follictdar Syphilides, — These occur aroimd the hair 
follicles and sebaceous glands, and may simulate acne vulgaris ; 
they frequently become pustular. 

Mucous Membranes. — A bright erythema of the palate and 
fauces is met with early in the secondary stage. Superficial 
lesions occur frequently on the fauces, tonsils, lips, or tongue. 
They constitute small oval or reniform erosions with a pearly 
translucent centre and a red margin. These “ mucous patches ’’ 
are soft, smooth, and painless. There is little or no cervical 
adenitis. The erosions are often transient, but occasionally 
they progress and coalesce, especially on the fauces, when 
they are termed ‘‘ snail-track ulcers,’’ from their slimy appear- 
ance. This condition may simulate faucial diphtheria or, 
when ulceration ensues, may be mistaken for Vincent's angina ; 
there is, however, no unpleasant odour. 

Other syphilitic manifestations in this stage are infrequent. 
Jaundice, with a tender enlarged liver, is sometimes seen and 
may rarely progress rapidly to a fatal acute liver atrophy. 
The spleen also may be enlarged. The kidneys are rarely 
affected, but gross albuminuria with few renal casts occasion- 
ally occurs, which responds readily to specific treatment. Iritis 
of plastic type may occur, but relapse is infrequent. The 
effects of secondary syphilis on the meninges and nervous 
system are discussed on page 869. 

Following the decline of the florid secondary stage there 
ensues a period of apparent quiescence termed “ latent 
8}rphilis,*^ which may vary in duration, until tertiary mani- 
festations appear, from two to over twenty years. The Wasser- 
mann reaction is usually positive throughout. During the 
first few years mucosal or cutaneous lesions may recur. These 
relapses, which lack the widespread distribution of the earlier 
secondary manifestation, tend to be isolated, more infiJ[trated, 
and of longer duration, e,g., faucial ulceration, rupia, and 
condylomata. A prolonged latency is a prominent feature of 
syphilis in women, particularly during the child-bearing period ; 
the offspring, however, are frequently infected. 



168 VENEREAL DISEASES 

The Tertiaby Stage. — ^The lesions of the tertiaiy stage are 
to some extent determined by such factors as intercurrent 
disease, prolonged physical strain, trauma, and €tge. They 
tend to be asymmetrical, isolated, and extensive, and limited 
to a particular tissue or organ ; ulceration is frequent ; although 
there is little tendency to natural resolution, response to 
treatment is rapid. 

Pathology. — The tissues affected by tertiary syphilis become 
gradually infiltrated with granulation tissue containing plasma 
cells and lymphocytes ; the smaller blood vessels are affected 
by endarteritis obliterans of gradual progression, which renders 
the area relatively avascular ; this results in slow necrosis of the 
central portion of the affected area with subsequent ulceration. 

Such an aggregation of syphilitic granulation tissue is 
known as a gumma ; frequently this forms a moderate-sized, 
painless circumscribed swelling of firm consistence and indefinite 
margins. Such gummata displace or replace normal tissues, 
affect surroimding structures by pressure, and when ulcerated, 
quickly become infected with pyogenic organisms. 

In situations which are protected from injury or irritation, 
gummata of long standing may become encapsuled by thick 
fibrous tissue, and remain thus for a long period. When 
situated in cutaneous structures or in superficial bones, necrosis 
occurs early and produces a circular punched-out ulcer con- 
taining a sloughy mass similar in appearance to wet wash- 
leather. On healing they present thin circular silvery scars 
often with a brown pigmented border, especially on the front 
of the legs where they are of frequent occurrence. The lumbar, 
gluteal, and scapular regions are also often affected. Tertiary 
syphilides also occur as isolated areas, sometimes very extensive, 
of diffuse gummatous infiltration of the skin with peripheral 
groups of reddish-brown nodules. Later the nodules fuse and 
degenerate into irregular areas of indolent ulceration which 
tends to heal in the centre whilst it slowly spreads at the 
margin. When situated on the face there is some resemblance 
to lupus vulgaris, but in syphilis the progress is more rapid. 

Gummata, diffuse or localised, of mucous membranes 
rapidly necrose, causing extensive ulceration in the nose, 
palate, pharynx, or larynx. 

Late Syphilis of Bone and Joints. — Syphilitic periostitis and 
osteo-myelitis give rise to the formation of a diffuse gummatous 
infiltration or of isolated tender nodes. The bone becomes 
rarefied, and around this there is a zone of bony sclerosis. The 
broking down of this gummatous material results in the slow 
disintegration of bone — a condition termed syphilitic curies^ 



159 


ACQUIRED SYPHILIS 

Syphilitic infection is frequent in the flat bones, such as 
those of the skull, the palate, the nasal bones, the nasal septum, 
the sternum, and clavicle, with subsequent ulceration and 
pyogenic infection. Suppurative meningitis or cerebral abscess 
rarely follows such a process in the bones of the skull, or there 
may be pressure effecte on the cerebral contents from the forma- 
tion of gummatous tissue on the inner surface of the calvaria. 
Among the long bones syphilis has a predilection for the tibia, 
less frequently the bones of the forearm or femur ; the shaft 
of the bone is usually involved, rarely the epiphysis. 

The joints are rarely affected in the tertiary stage of the 
disease. Gummatous disease of a joint involves chiefly either 
the synovial membrane — gummatous synovitis — or the articular 
ends of the bones — gummatous osteoarthritis ; in the latter 
condition, destruction of articular cartilage and osteophytic 
formation may result in fibrous or bony ankylosis. The disease 
usually affects one large articulation, generally a knee or 
ankle ; but other joints, including those of the spine, may be 
involved. The simulation of a tuberculous arthritis is close. 
Charcot’s joint or tabetic neuro-arthropathy is a degenerative 
condition not due to articular sjq)hilitic disease [vide p. 872). 

Visceral Syphilis. — Syphilis of the liver is described on 
page 469. Syphilis may affect the kidneys in the tertiary stage 
by producing a condition of chronic glomerulo -nephritis which 
responds well to antisyphilitic treatment. The testes are 
often affected with a diffuse gummatous orchitis producing 
a solid heavy enlargement devoid of sensation. 

Ulceration in the rectum in women eventually forming a 
stricture was formerly considered to be frequently of syphilitic 
origin. These conditions now appear to be due chiefly to 
gonococcal pelvic cellulitis and proctitis, or more rarely 
lymphogranuloma inguinale. 

Tertiary lesions are common in the mouth, especially in 
men. In chronic superficial glossitis, which is very frequently 
of syphilitic origin, the surface of the tongue presents irregular 
white patches. This is known as leukoplakia. Sometimes it is 
lobulated from a deeper contracting sclerosis of syphilitic origin ; 
between the lobules fissures develop which are often the pre- 
cursors of carcinoma linguse. Isolated gummata, which are 
situated more deeply, occur in the centre of the tongue, and 
frequently ulcerate. The latter respond readily to anti- 
syphilitic treatment but leukoplakia rarely improves. 

In the palate, fauces, nasal cavity, pharynx, larynx, and 
oesophagus ulceration may be extensive simulating lupus or a 
malignant ulcer. ^ 



160 


VENEREAL DISEASES 


Syphilis of the cardio-vasoular system is described elsewhere 
{pide p. 684). 

Asymptomatic Neuro-syphilis. — In this phase, although there 
are no physical signs or symptoms of involvement of the 
central system, examination of the cerebrospinal fluid will 
reveal some abnormahty indicative of a persistent syphilitic 
process. Asymptomatic neuro-syphilis may be present in the 
latent or tertiary stages of syphilis, and may occur with or 
without other sjrphilitic manifestations. It is a phase of 
considerable importance because it is the precursor of clinical 
neuro-syphilis, and because its early recognition and treat- 
ment may prevent the onset of tabes dorsalis or general paralysis 
of the insane. Asymptomatic neuro -syphilis should be sus- 
pected in cases whose blood Wassermann reaction remains 
persistently positive in spite of full treatment, in those treated 
cases who suffer a serological relapse, and in all cases of latent 
83 rphihs. In these cases examination of the cerebrospinal 
fluid, including the cell count, globulin and protein estimation, 
Wassermann reaction and Lange reactions, is imperative 
(see p. 859). 

This symptom-free phase may last from one to ten years 
or more, during which period the pathological changes in the 
cerebrospinal fluid are gradually progressing in degree. At 
first protein and cellular changes are slight in degree ; the 
Wassermann test is negative or slightly positive, and the 
Lange reaction shows slight j) 08 itive changes. Later both 
cell number and protein content show a decided increase, the 
Wassermann reaction becomes markedly positive, and the 
Lange test approaches the luetic or paretic zone. 


CONGENITAL SYPHILIS 

Congenital syphilis is an infection that is acquired in uiero 
from the mother, usually in the later months of pregnancy, 
and is, strictly speaking, not an inherited disease. Owing to 
the nature of the attachment of the foetus to the uterus, con- 
genital syphilis shows no stage comparable to the primary 
stage of acquired syphilis but is generalised from the onset. 
Spirochsetes are present in profusion in tiie liver, spleen, 
ach^nals, lungs, and many other organs. 

The syphllitio baby is usually apparently healthy at birth, 
but within two to six weeks it begins to lose weight, becomes 
thin, wrinkled, and sallow, and shortly after shows eruptions 



CONGfiNll'AL SYPfiiLlS i6l 

oil the skin and mucous membranes. A muco-purulent dis- 
charge from the nose known as “ snuffles begins in three to 
four weeks, and interferes with the development of the nasal 
bones, resulting later in the “ saddle-nose ” deformity. 

Cutanetms Lesions , — Rashes are one of the commonest 
manifestations of congenital syphilis, occurring in 60 per cent, 
of cases ; they appear from three to eight weeks after birth. 
They are protean in character, and may be erythematous, 
macular, papular, or vesicular ; of these, the scaly macular 
eruption is the most frequent. Their colour varies from a 
yellowish tinge to a coppery or raw ham tint. They may be 
scanty or profuse and are usually well marked on the buttocks, 
flexor surface of the limbs, and face. Whilst chiefly dry and 
scaly, they are apt to become eczematous in the napkin area. 
Condylomata are frequent around the anus. The rare pemphigus 
eruption occurs early and may be present at birth. It consists 
of sero-purulent bullae, well marked on the palms and soles, 
and produces a severe general reaction, often with a fatal 
termination. Mucous patches in the mouth or on the fauces 
are common. 

Rhagades are fissures appearing on the margins of the lips, 
which follow circum-oral syphilitic eczema and leave per- 
manent scarring. The larynx may be the seat of syphilitic 
inflammation, causing a hoarse cry. 

Bone Lesions, — These are common and occur early. 
Pseudo -paralysis of infants is caused by an acute epiphysitis 
termed osteochondritis sypliUitica which attacks the end of 
a long bone, most frequently the humerus, radius, or ulna ; 
it produces tender swelling of the neighbouring joint and 
varying degrees of loss of power in the limb. Acute or chronic 
periostitis of the shaft is very common at anj’^ age and may 
give few clinical signs. X-ray examination is a valuable method 
of diagnosis. Syphilitic dactyhtis of the phalanges or meta- 
carpals results in a fusiform swelling. 

In the skull, hypertrophy of spongy bone at the edges of 
the anterior fontaneUe gives rise to Parrot’s nodes, a condition 
which, when well marked, is termed the hot-cross bun skull, 
but is not characteristic of syphilis alone. Cranio-tabes, a 
parchment-like thinning of the parietal and occipital bones, 
is also met with in other debilitating diseases such as rickets. 
Roth these conditions are now^ rarely seen. 

Visceral Lesions , — In the early months of infancy there 
niay be marked enlargement of the spleen and liver. Renal 
infection may be shown by the presence of blood, albumen, 
and casts in the urine. Paroxysmal hcemoglobinuria is 


II 



165 VENEREAL DISEASES 

frequently due to congenital syphilis. White pneumonia, 
usually in still-bom children, is an interstitial fibrosis of the 
lung of syphilitic origin. The testicles in infancy may undergo 
bilateral painless enlargement, frequently followed by atrophy. 
Disseminated choroiditis or optic neuritis followed by atrophy 
may be present in infancy, but both are rare. 

Delayed Congenital Syphilis. — If the infant survives, 
there is a latent period between the lesions of infancy and those 
of later childhood comparable to the latent period in acquired 
syphilis, or the early manifestations of syphilis may be absent. 
During this interv^ the child may develop normally, or be 
stunted in growth and backward in mentality ; later, various 
lesions may follow. 

Lesions of bones and joints are of frequent occurrence ; 
syphilitic periostitis is particularly common, and in the tibiae 
produces characteristic irregular nodes on the anterior surface 
of the heavy thickened and forward curved tibiae — the sabre- 
blade tibia. This condition is bilateral, although the changes 
may be more advanced on one or other side. Periostitis gives 
rise to general or nodular enlargement of the clavicle, or 
localised swellings on sternum, skull, or bones of the forearm 
and leg. Dactylitis may occur later as well as in infancy. 
Symmetrical painless synovitis of the knee-joints, known us 
Clnttoii's joints, are met with about puberty ; gummatous 
synovitis simulating tuberculosis of a joint is less frequent. 

The eyes are liable to chronic interstitial keratitis at any 
age up to and including adult life, but most frequently between 
six and sixteen years. The condition is bilateral, and usually 
affects one eye before the other ; the cornea appears opaque, 
resembling ground glass, and ciliary congestion is marked. 
Vascularisation of the cornea gives rise to the “ salmon 
patches.” Fair recovery usually takes place after the condition 
has lasted from one to two years, but relapse is frequent. 
Iritis, choroiditis, or retinitis may coexist, leaving permanent 
changes and interference with vision. 

Neuro-syphilitic lesions may occur in congenital infection. 
Juvenile tabes and general paralysis occur in adolescence, 
comparable to similar lesions in acquired syphUis. The 
cerebrospinal fluid is abnormal in from 20 to 40 per cent, of 
all cases of congenital syphilis. Meningo -vascular conditions 
also occur, and congenital syphilis is considered to be sometimes 
a causative factor in epilepsy, imbecility, spastic diplegia, and 
hydrocephalus. Nerve deafness occurs about puberty ; the con- 
dition is bilateral, and frequently complete and permanent. 

Cutaneous manifestations, which resemble those of the 



CONGENITAL SYPHILIS 


163 


tertiary stage in acquired syphilis, are seen in late childhood. 
Favourite sites are the face, especially around the nose and the 
mouth, and the skin over the sternum, ribs, clavicle, and front 
of the leg. They are chronic, frequently ulcerate, and extend 
slowly, healing in the centre and simulating tuberculous lesions. 
Ulceration of the hard and soft palate is frequent, and in the 
larynx may cause severe stenosis on healing. 

The milk teeth frequently exhibit imperfections, but none 
that are characteristic of congenital syphilis. The permanent 
teeth, however, show striking changes, especially in the upper 
central incisors, which are known as Hutchinson's teeth. There 
may be irregular erosions in the cutting edge or irregular 
atrophy, but a typical example presents a single clearly marked 
crescentic notch in the cutting edge, and the tooth is peg- 
8hai)ed, short, and narrow. 

The early cutaneous lesions of congenital syphilis are infec- 
tive ; in later years the infectivity is very slight, but syphilis 
has been shown to be transmitted to the third generation, 
although such cases are very rare. 

Syphilis and Pregnancy 

Acquired syphilis in women, apart from pregnancy, runs 
a milder course than that in men. Syphilis associated with 
pregnancy, however, undergoes considerable modifications. 
When acquired at the time of conception or during the course 
of pregnancy there is frequently an inhibition of the early 
stages ; no primary stage is noted, and secondary lesions are 
either slight or absent. This latency as regards the mother may 
persist until the menopause, after which the various tertiary 
syphilides may become manifest. The majority of these 
patients have a positive Wassermann test, but this may vary 
during pregnancy. A positive Wassermann reaction given by 
the umbilical cord blood is an indicator of infection in the 
mother and not necessarily in the infant. 

The child may suffer from severe syphilis, even though the 
condition be latent in the mother. As a rule, the earlier 
pregnancies result in syphilitic still-birtLs ; later pregnancies 
produce living but syphilitic children, and ultimately a normal 
child may result. The infectivity of the mother to the foetus 
varies in an unaccountable manner, and it is not imcommon to 
see in a large family a healthy child interposed in age between 
others bearing manifestations of syphilis. 

A child suffering from active congenital syphilis does not 
infect its mother, although a healthy nurse may become 



164 VENEREAL DISEASES 

infected. This observation, known as CoUes's law, depends on 
the fact that the mother is already syphilitic, usually in the 
latent stage, and cannot be reinfected. Although there are 
frequently no clinical signs in the mother the Wasser- 
mann reaction is very often positive. 

The Wassermann Reaction 

During the course of syphilis certain changes take place in 
the blood as a result of its reaction to the presence of spiro- 
chsetes. These are indicated qualitatively, and to some extent 
quantitatively, by the reaction known as the Wassermann test. 
Positive results are met with in yaws and in leprosy, but in 
England a positive result to this test almost invariably indicates 
syphilis ; a negative result, however, as will be noted later, 
does not invariably exclude syphilis. 

In the stage of incubation and in the earlier part of the 
primary stage the reaction is negative, a positive result being 
rarely found before fourteen days after the appearance of the 
primary lesion. From this time imtil the manifestations of 
the secondary stage appear there is a gradual increase in the 
percentage of positive results, the reaction being most markedly 
positive in the florid stage of secondary syphilis. 

In the latent and tertiary' stages of the disease the Wasser- 
mann test is positive in 60 to 70 per cent, of cases. 

The Wassermami test in congenital syphilis with active 
lesions is positive in 90 per cent, of cases ; in the stage of 
latency the occurrence of a positive reaction is less frequent, 
and after puberty tends to disappear. Following the adminis- 
tration of arsenical remedies, the Wassermann reaction may 
become negative and remain so, provided treatment is both 
early and efficient. 

Various flocculation serum reactions, in which the mixing 
of syphilitic serum with an alcoholic extract of heart muscle 
produces visible flocculi, are now also employed in diagnosis. 
The Kahn reaction, which is most generally used in this country, 
is slightly more sensitive than the Wassermann reaction. 


THE TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS 

The modem treatment of syphilis by arsenical compounds, 
bismuth and mercury, is followed by extremely favourable 
results, provided that it is commenced in the early stage and 
maintained regularly. Any delay in the institution of treatment 



THE TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS 165 

renders cure less likely. The results of treatment commenced 
in the sero-negative primary stage are overwhelmingly superior 
to those begun in any later stage ; it is, therefore, of the utmost 
importance to establish the diagnosis of syphilis before the 
advent of a positive Wassermann test, and this can only be 
done with certainty by finding spirochseta pallida in the serum 
expressed from the primary lesions. 

Since the introduction of the original arsphenamine (Sal- 
varsan or “ 606”) by Ehrlich in 1910 and of neoarsphenamine 
(Neosalvarsan “ 914 ”) a few years later, syphilis has been 
treated mainly by compounds of this type. The drug most 
fi*equently in use at the present time is neoarsphenamine, 
an organic arsenical compound containing about 20 per cent, 
of arsenic. Although the efficiency of this compound is shghtly 
less than that of the original salvarsan, its decreased toxicity 
and ease of administration have led to its general use. 

Neoarsphenamine is manufactured under various names, 
e.gr., novarsenobillon (N.A.B.), novostab, neokharsivan, and 
neosalvarsan. 

Of the arsphenamine preparations the only ones in common 
use are stabilarsan and mapharside. The former is a combination 
of the arsphenamine base with glucose, and, like the neoarsphena- 
mines, may be given intravenously in a concentrated solution. 

Mapharside, which is an oxidation product of arsphenamine, 
contains much less arsenic per dose than other arsenicals. 
It is the arsphenamine compound now utilised for the intensive 
short-period treatment which is being evolved for the treatment 
of early syphilis. In this method, which has superseded the 
continuous intravenous-drip therapy, one or more injections 
of Mapharside are given daily until a total of 1,200 to 
1,600 mg. is reached over a period of five to twenty days. 
No bismuth treatment is given. The immediate results of 
this short-period treatment are comparable to those fix)m the 
usual long-period treatment. This intensive treatment, which 
is suitable for in-patients only, results in a greater incidence 
of toxic effects, particularly peripheral neuritis and haemorrhagic 
encephalitis. This method has the great advantage of completing 
the treatment of early syphilis within a few weeks, an important 
advance from the public health aspect. 

Bismuth and less frequently mercury are also used in the 
treatment of 83rphili8 in conjunction with the organic arsenicals. 
Recent work has shown that the action of bismuth is superior 
to that of mercury. Numerous preparations of bismuth are 
advocated of which the metallic suspensions or bismuth oxy- 
chloride aie the most suitable. 



166 VENEREAL DISEASES 

Mercury by injection is now little used but is frequently 
given orally as liquor bydrargyri perchloridi drachm -J- to 1 or 
pulvis hydrargyri cum creta grains 1 to 5 in the later stages. 

In cases of primary and secondary syphilis a neoarsphena- 
mine preparation is administered without delay. This is 
injected intravenously in a 10 per cent, solution in cold sterile 
distUled water not sooner than two hours after a meal. 

For men of average weight and otherwise in good health 
the initial dose is 0*45 grm. This is followed by eight weekly 
intravenous injections of 0*6 grm. increasing to 0*75 grm. in 
men over eleven stone in weight. 

Each week during this treatment a bismuth preparation 
equivalent to 0*2 grm. of bismuth metal is inject^ into the 
muscles of the buttock. The bismuth may be given on the same 
day as the intravenous injection but an interval of three to four 
days is advisable. 

In women the average initial dose of neoarsphenamine is 
0*3 grm. and subsequent doses should not exceed 0*6 grm. 
For men or women of less than average weight, or in slightly 
impaired health from concurrent disease, the individual dosage 
is slightly reduced. 

Such a series of injections constitutes a course of treatment. 
After an interval of four weeks a second similar course is 
administered followed by a similar rest interval. Iodides are 
given during the intervals, 

A Wassermann test is done at the beginning of each course. 
In all at least four such courses should be given to cases in which 
the Wassermann reaction is negative after the first course. 

A small proportion of cases will fail to become negative 
after as many as six courses. Before prolonging treatment 
attention should be paid to the general health and to signs 
of syphihtic involvement of the central nervous system. 

When intravenous injection is difficult or in cases of mild 
general intolerance the treatment may be continued by intra- 
muscular injections of sulpharsphenamine compounds, c.gr., 
sulphostab or kharsulphan, 0*3 to 0*45 grm. 

When intolerance to arsenical compounds by any route is 
evident, prolonged courses of bismuth treatment are relied 
upon, and in such cases the rapidly absorbed oil-soluble bismuth 
compounds are indicated. The use of bismuth over long periods 
may cause albuminuria or stomatitis ; the latter is usually 
dependent upon associated pyorrhoea. Any dental sepsis 
should be attended to at the beginning of treatment. 

During pregnancy intravenous injections of neoarsphena- 
mine and bismuth therapy are well tolerated and can be 



THE TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS 


167 


administered up to the eighth month ; the risk of abortion is 
very slight. With efficient treatment throughout pr^nancy 
there is a minimal risk of congenital disease in the child. 

Congenital Syphilis. — Syphilitic conditions arising early in 
infancy respond well to organic arsenical compounds and 
bismuth. The inimction of mercury is also of value. Treatment 
follows the same general lines as in adults. The toleration of 
infants and children for these remedies is excellent. In infancy 
the disease is treated with sulpharsphenamine compounds by 
intramuscular injection. Intravenous injection is difficult and 
less suitable for children under the age of five. 

Sulpharsphenamine (suiphostab, kharsulphan, or suUarsenol) 
may be given to an infant a few weeks old in weekly doses 
of 0-005 grm. For severely affected or premature infants 
oral treatment with acetarsol (Orarsan) tablets is more suitable. 
This arsenical compound may be given, in milk, in daily doses 
of 6 mg. per lb. body-weight in the first week of treatment 
increasing up to 12 mg. per lb. body-weight in the fourth to 
the ninth week of treatment. 

In less severely affected infants treatment may be com- 
menced with sulpharsphenamine. For an infant a month old 
the initial amount is 0-01 grm., increasing each week by 
graduated amoimts to 0-05 grm. at the end of the coiupse 
of ten weekly injections. 

A few weeks later a bismuth preparation, e.gr., a metallic 
bismuth suspension or bismuth oxychloride, is injected into the 
gluteal muscles in Weekly amounts equivalent to 0-02 grm. 
of bismuth metal for twelve weeks. 

Older children require larger amovmts of these remedies. 
For a child one year old and of average weight ten weekly 
injections of sulpharsphenamine are advisable increasing 
gradually from 0-026 to 0-1 grm. This is followed after 
a few weeks’ interval by the equivalent of 0*04 grm. of 
bismuth metal in each of twelve weekly injections into the 
buttock. 

Since children suffering from congenital S3q>hilis are 
frequently debilitated and underweight the amounts to be 
given of these remedies should be considered in terms of weight 
rather than of age. In general after the age of three months 
children of any age can be given 0-005 grm. of sulphar- 
sphenamine for each pound weight as the maximum weekly 
amount for a series of injections. Initial amounts should hie 
about 0-002 grm. for each pound of the child’s weight. 

Thus for a child weighing 30 lb. the initial injection 
should be 0-06 grm. and the maximum amount 0-16 grm. : 



168 VENEREAL DISEASES 

for a child of 75 lb. weight the initial amount should be 
0*16 grm. and maximum amount 0*375 grm. 

The continuation of each course and the progressive increase 
in dosage depends upon the improvement in the local and 
general condition, a progressive gain in weight and the absence 
of intolerance to these remedies. 

The courses of arsenical treatment are followed after a 
few weeks’ interval by a series of ten to twelve weekly injections 
of bismuth. At the age of three to six months amounts 
equivalent to 0-02 grm. of metallic bismuth increasing to 
0-03 grm. are given. As an approximate guide to dosage 
the equivalent of 0*01 grm. of metallic bismuth for each 
five poxmds of the child’s weight may be considered as a 
maximum dose* Mercury should not be given during bismuth 
therapy. 

Potassium iodide is not well tolerated in infancy. Syr. 
Ferri lodidi minims 5, t.d.s. is preferable. The green iodide of 
mercury, | to 1 gr., is also used. 

The treatment of congenital syphilis is prolonged for at 
least three to five years. The child must be subjected to 
close periodic clinical and serological observation until after 
puberty. The cerebrospinal fluid should be examined in all 
cases with a persistently positive Wassermann reaction in the 
blood after three years’ treatment. 

Treatment of Tertiary Syphilis. — The general condition of 
the patient and in particular the state of the lungs, heart, liver, 
and other vital organs must be considered. In these late cases 
much harm to the general health may be caused by injudiciously 
intensive treatment with organic arsenical remedies at a time 
when the complete eradication of syphilis is probably impossible. 
The main object of treatment at this stage is to keep the patient 
reasonably well and not to attempt to sterilise the tissues, 
possibly at heavy cost to the general health. 

In general, treatment should be mild in intensity but 
prolonged. Potassium iodide, 30 to 60 gr. daily, has a 
marked absorptive action on gummatous deposits. Neo- 
arsphenamines are given, only after preliminary iodide therapy, 
in small or moderate amounts at intervals of one or two weeks. 
Intravenous injections should not be given to patients over 
sixty years old. Arsenic and bismuth injections are given in 
separate courses. 

A pregnant woman suffering from syphilis in any stage 
requires intensive treatment if the health of the child is the 
main consideration. 

Qummatous lesions of the skin, mucous membranes and soft 



169 


THE TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS 

skeletal structures react readily to treatment. In visceral 
gummata there is a rapid initial effect but final resolution may 
be slow. The effect of treatment upon the late syphilitic 
affections of bone is very slow although symptoms may 
disappear promptly. Elderly patients suffering from tertiary 
syphilis whose indifferent health is partly due to additional 
causes are best treated by the prolonged use of bismuth in- 
jections and the oral administration of mercury and iodides. 

The treatment of cardiovascular syphilis and neurosypbilis 
is dealt with elsewhere {vide p. 588 and p. 875). 

Thb Toxic Effects of the Okoanic 
Absbnical Compounds 

Various toxic effects following the use of salvarsan were 
reported soon after its introduction in 1910, and an attempt 
to reduce its toxicitj^ without detracting from its efficiency 
has been one of the chief reasons imderlying the production 
of neoarsphenamine and sulpharsphenamine. 

The various toxic effects of these arsenical preparations them- 
selves may be divided clinically into an early and a late group. 

Early Reactions. — Nausea and vomiting, either during or 
immediately following an intravenous injection, are commonly 
met with ; some hours later there may be mild diarrhoea or, 
rarely, transient jaundice. 

Following the first or second intravenous injection there 
may occur, but rarely, a group of symptoms which has been 
termed “ nitritoid crisis ” or “ vasomotor crisis.’’ This reaction, 
which ensues during or immediately after the intravenous 
injection, consists of the sudden onset of dyspnoea, dilatation 
of the pupils, cyanotic flushing, and tingling of the hands and 
feet which are followed rapidly by varying degrees of transient 
unconsciousness. Later oedema of the face, especially the 
lips and eyelids, may follow. 

Transient cutaneous eruptions of general distribution, 
either erythematous or urticarial in type, may supervene at 
any time within the first two days after injection. Such 
reactions are likely to be repeated after further injections. 

The most serious of these early reactions is encephalitis 
hsemorrhagica, which supervenes within twenty-four to thirty- 
six hours ; this complication is very uncommon, but is usually 
fatal. It is more frequently seen during intensive arsenotlierapy . 
Purpura hsemorrhagica is a rare toxic effect but even if mild 
is a warning of a dangerous idiosyncrasy to arsenic ; such 
cases may develop aplastic anssmia. 



170 VENEREAL DISEASES 

Preverdion and Treoimcnf.-Intravenous injections of 
syphilitic remedies should not be admmister^ i^tlun two ho^ 
of any heavy meal, and aU solutions should be freshly 
and administered slowly. The most efficient treatment for the 
vasomotor reaction is an immediate subcutaneous injection of 
1 c.c. of a I in 1,000 solution of adrenalin. 

Late Toxic Reactions.— During active treatment over long 
periods, minor toxic effects such as general malaise, depression, 
and loss of weight may occur at any time. 

Arsenical Dermatitis is usually an acute generalised eruption 
of the exfoliative type associate with intense irritation ; in 
mild cases it may not progress beyond the erythematous or 
papular stages, in which case it is likely to be taken for a simple 
erythema, or, if papular, for lichen planus. 

In the severe type an initial acute general erythema wdth 
some infiltration of the skin and mucous membranes is soon 


followed by the formation of vesicles and buUse ; the condition 
progresses rapidly into a state of acute weeping dermatitis, 
with crusting and exfoliation. Secondary infection of the raw 
surfaces is a common sequel, and abscess formation may take 
place in the axiUaiy, inguinal, or cervical glands. The condition 
is protracted, and some of these cases are fatal from broncho- 
pneumonia or oedema of the lungs. 

Unlike the earlier toxic reactions, arsenical dermatitis 


supervenes after some weeks or months of treatment. 

Treatment . — Complete rest in bed, application of calamine 
lotion or olive oil, and daily intravenous injections of 0-45 to 
0-9 grm. of sodium thiosulphate. Scrupulous care should be 
taken in dressing any raw areas to avoid infection. 

Jaundice. — Whilst well known as one of the signs of 
secondary syphilis, jaundice may also be produced by the toxic 
effects of arsenical therapy. A mild jaundice is met with a 
few days after an injection, but the more serious intense 
jaundice occurs several weeks or even months after the end of 
a series of injections, and on account of this interval is often 
erroneously regarded as a catarrhal jaundice and not as a 
complication of the treatment. The more severe cases may 
rarely develop acute hepatic necrosis with a rapidly fatal 
termination. 


Recent investigation with hepatic function teste has shown 
that slight hepatic damage after the administration of arsenical 
compounds is much more frequent than the occurrence of 
jaundice would lead us to expect. The detection of a rise in 
the bilirubin content of the blood serum is an indication for 


the cessation of treatment, which may prevent the production 



THE TREATMENT OF SYPHILIS 


171 


of any further damage to the liver. Similarly, the appearance 
of excess of urobilinogen in the urine during treatment indicates 
hepatic damage. Jaundice during arsenotherapy is more 
frequent in military hospitals than in civil clinics. It has 
been suggested that a virus injection is an important aetiological 
factor. 

Treatment . — ^Rest in bed, mild piu^atives, and daily intra- 
venous injection of calcium thiosulphate, 0-6 grm. 

Glucose should also be given orally ; in the severe cases 
intravenous glucose is advisable. 

V. E. Lloyd. 



TROPICAL DISEASES* 

INTRODUCTION 

A ll those diseases which are commonly met with in 
temperate countries are encountered also in tropical and 
subtropical chmates. It is important to bear this con- 
stantly in mind so that the quest for tropical diseases shall 
not tempt the practitioner to overlook conditions which he 
would readily recognise at home. Except in epidemics and in 
particular areas it is unlikely that more than a small percentage 
of the patients who seek medical advic*e will do so on account 
of purely tropical disease. 

It should be remembered, too, that residence in hot climates 
has effects on the physiological prociesses of the body for which 
due allowance must be made, and that a dual pathology is far 
more often present than in temperate climates. Thus an 
oliguria that would be pathological in a temperate climate 
may be physiological in the tropics, while an attack of malaria 
is apt to light up other dormant conditions or, alternatively, 
a malarial attack may be precipitated by some other illness 
such as pneumonia. Dysentery and malaria frequently coexist 
and may have many symptoms in common : ankylostomiasis 
may be only one of several causative factors in a case in which 
a microcytic anaemia is the chief feature ; enlargement of 
the liver and spleen may be due to malaria and kala-azar 
as well as to schistosomiasis, while tuliereulosis, syphilis, 
splenic anaemia and malignant disease must still be l>ome in 
mind. 

In no branch of medicine are preventive as opposed to 
curative measures so necessary or so successful as in the case 
of tropical diseases. The great majority of the incapacitating 
and killing diseases of the tropics are conveyed by arthropod 
vectors. In some the causative organism has an essential cycle 
of development in the arthropod, in others the arthropod passes 

* Helminthio infections, the dietary defioienoies, and effects of heat and oUmate 
aie dealt with in other seotkins. 


172 



MALARIA 


173 


on the organism mechanically. In still other diseases water is 
the medium of infection. In all these conditions treatment of 
the individual who has become infected is a poor substitute for 
the attention to hygiene and sanitation that could have pre- 
vented such infection. For example, the treatment of cases 
of malaria as they occur, necessary as it is, is of little avail if 
nothing is done to control the mosquitoes that cause the disease, 
while dysentery will be wiped out not by treating its victims 
but by doing away with the insanitary conditions that alone 
enable it to claim them. It is by such hygienic measures that 
Great Britain has been freed from typhus and cholera which 
were once a scourge and which have now been banished to those 
countries where ignorance and prejudice stiU enable them to 
survive. Some knowledge of the life cycles and habits of the 
various hosts and vectors and an acquaintance with the sanitary 
measures appropriate for their destruction or control are 
therefore essentials of tropical practice. 


MALARIA 

Malaria is the most important of all the tropical diseases, 
being responsible for more than 3^ milhon deaths every year 
and for an incalculable amount of invalidism. Although far 
more common in tropical and subtropical countries, it occurs 
also in temperate zones. 

iEtiology. — The disease is caused by protozoal parasites 
of the genus Plasmodium which are conveyed from man to 
man by female anopheline mosquitoes. Only three species of 
plasmodia are of importance, P. falciparum causing maUgnant 
tertian (subtertian), P. vivax causing benign tertian, and P. 
malaricB causing quartan malaria. These plasmodia have two 
distinct cycles of development or multiplication. The asexual 
cycle takes place in the red blood cells of man and differs 
somewhat in the various species, causing fever at regular 
intervals corresponding to the duration of the cycle of the 
species concerned, less than forty-eight hours in the case of 
P. fahiparum, forty-eight hours in the case of P. vivax, and 
seventy-two hours in the case of P. maiarice. During this 
cycle each infected red cell bursts and liberates eight to thirty- 
two young parasites, each of which infects another cell, and, 
at the same time, certain sexually differentiated forms (gameto- 
cytes) develop. The gametocjiies alone are able to initiate the 
sexual cycle which occurs in the mosquito after it has fed on 
the blood of an infected person. The final products of the 



174 TROPICAL DISEASES 

sexual cycle (sporozoites), many himdreds of which are produced 
by each pair of gametocytes, are injected into man by the 
mosquito when it bites again and each sporozoite infects a red 
cell. The sexual cycle in the mosquito is similar in all species 
and takes about ten days. 

Control ol Malaria. — For the occurrence and continued 
existence of malaria there must therefore be : — 

1. Vectors of the infection, female anopheline mosquitoes. 

2. Infected persons (having gametocytes in their blood) 
from whom the mosquito may derive its infection. 

3. Susceptible persons to whom the infection may be trans- 
mitted. 

4. Opportunities for the mosquitoes to bite both infected 
and susceptible persons. 

If any one of these essentials could be completely eUniinated 
malaria would cease to exist. As this is impossible in practice, 
control of the disease involves the prosecution of measures 
directed against all four, namely : — 

1. Anti-mosquito measures directed mainly against the 
aquatic larval forms in their breeding places, oiling the surface 
of water, clearing streams, draining or filling in stagnant pools, 
screening wells and cisterns, etc. Indoors adult mosquitoes 
may be swatted and discouraged by fumigants. 

2. Protection against mosquito bites by the regular use of 
mosquito nets, remembering that it is quite as important to 
protect the infected as the uninfected. Bright lights and 
draughts discourage mosquitoes as do the various strong- 
smelling insecticides. CitroneUa oil applied to the skin will 
repel the insects for an hour or two. Shorts should be re- 
placed by trousers after dusk, and these should be tucked 
into the socks xinless mosquito boots are worn. Ideally aU 
living quarters should be screened by mosquito-proof gauze. 

3. Thorough treatment of all cases of malaria which would 
otherwise constitute a reservoir of infection and the taking of 
a daily suppressive dose of 5 to 10 gr. of quinine by persons 
resident in heavily infected areas. Actually this does not 
prevent infection since quinine is not lethal to sporozoites, but 
it often prevents or postpones clinical manifestations. The 
taking of suppressive quinine is not justifiable as a routine 
procedure over long periods for everyone hving in districts 
where malaria is endemic as it is apt to cause mental depression 
and dyspepsia. But when a person has important work to do 
in a highly malanous area and sickness must be avoided at all 
costs it is fully justified. It is most important that the quinine 
should be taken regularly and that it should be continued for 



MALARIA 


176 


at least a month after leaving the area. Atebrin in a weekly 
dosage of 0*4 to 0*6 grm. may be substituted for quinine but 
plasmoquine is too toxic a drug for general use as a suppressive. 
Atebrin should be taken in daily doses of 0-1 grm. on four 
or six days a week. 

Pathology. — In the acute stage of malaria, especially in 
subtertian, blockage of the capillaries of various organs by 
infected red cells causes local congestion, cedema and stasis. 
The rupture of numbers of infected red cells during each asexual 
cycle liberates, in addition to a new generation of parasites, 
haemoglobin from the cells and a dark pigment from the parasite 
itself. This pigment possesses toxic and haemolytic properties 
and there follows a progressive anaemia, toxaemia, haemo- 
globinaemia and pigmentation of the cells and organs of the 
reticulo-endothelial system. The liver and spleen enlarge as 
they attempt to deal with the products of haemolysis, while the 
efforts at blood regeneration are reflected in the hyperplasia 
of the haemopoietic tissues. 

Symptoms. — After an incubation period of one to three 
weeks or more the first bout of fever occurs. Onset is sudden, 
usually with a rigor, and occurs most commonly before mid- 
day. There are three well-marked stages. 

1. The Cold Stage, — ^The patient shivers, the teeth chatter 
and the skin is blue and “ goosey,” and he piles on all the bed 
clothes he can find. There is headache and often vomiting. 
The sensation of cold is purely subjective as the temperature 
is already rising. This stage lasts for one or two hours. 

2. Th^ Hot Stage, — The patient begins to feel hot and the 
lieadache grows worse. The bed clothes are thrown off, the 
skin becomes flushed and diy and the pulse full and rapid. 
The temperature rises to 104^, 105° or even higher. This 
stage lasts from three to four hours. 

3. The Sweating Stage, — Gradually the skin becomes moist, 
the patient breaks into a profuse sweat, saturating the bed 
clothes, and the temperature begins to fall. After two to four 
hours the sweating ceases, the temperature falls te normal, 
and the patient may feel so much better that it may be difficult 
to prevent his going to work. 

In benign tertian malaria attacks recur on alternate days 
until cut short by treatment, while in quartan malaria there 
are two clear days between attacks. When mixed or multiple 
i^ections are present this regiilar sequence is broken. Some- 
times the rigor may be absent and one or other of the stages is 
shortened or lengthened. 

In malignant tertian infections the onset is often insidious, 



176 TROPICAL DISEASES 

the rigor does not occur and the stages are less well defined. 
Pyrexial periods are prolonged and apyrexial periods shortened 
so that fever is often quotidian or remittent. 

Malignant Malaria (M,T,y Svbtertion ), — Any case of malaria 
is liable suddenly to develop pernicious symptoms and to kill 
the patient with hardly a warning sign. For this reason every 
case should be regarded and treated as an emergency. These 
pernicious cases occur most commonly in liyperendemic areas 
and at the most malarious season of the year and are nearly 
always due to infection with P. falciparum. They fall roughly 
into two main types — cerebral and algid. 

The cerebral type may be characterised by hyperpyrexia 
up to 110° F. or more with wild delirium terminating in fatal 
coma. Sometimes coma may supervene without any warning 
signs ; convulsions or pareses may occur and permanent mental 
changes may result. 

The algid type causes shock, collapse and a tendency to fatal 
syncope. Gastric, dysenteric, pneumonic*, haemorrluigic and 
syncopal forms are recognised. 

Two other types known as “ typhoid remittent ” and 
“ bihous remittent ” are less dangerous but are liable to be 
very difficult to diagnose and to treat. 

These pernicious types are caused by obstruction of the 
capillaries of the various organs concerned by parasitised red 
cells. 

Relapses. — Oases of malaria are liable to relapse even up 
to several years after the initial infection and even after the 
most thorough treatment. These relapses are caused by 
parasites which persist in the blood and especially in the spleen. 
Any cause of splenic contraction such as shock, cold, fright, 
and certain drugs is therefore liable to precipitate a relapse. 
Relapses occur far less frequently and over a shorter j)eriod 
following malignant tertian than is the case with benign tertian 
and quartan malaria. 

Chronic Malaria. — After several relapses or reinfections 
malaria tends to become chronic. The spleen enlarges, often 
to many times its normal size, later becoming hard, fibrosed, 
small and of a “ slatey colour, the typical “ ague-cake 
spleen. The liver undergoes somewhat similar changes. TJiero 
are cachexia and a sallow and jaundiced skin as the result of 
chronic ansemia, and a leucopenia with relative monocytosis 
is usually present. The general wasting and debility render the 
patient an easy prey to intercurrent disease. 

Immuiiity. — There is no appreciable degree of natural 
immunity to malaria. A considerable immunity can be 



MALARIA 177 

acquired over a period of years but only at a great risk to life 
and as the result of prolonged illness. 

Diagnosis. — Owing to the protean nature of malarial 
symptoms it may resemble almost any febrile disease, but 
enteric fever, kala-azar, amoebic hepatitis and the various 
short fevers such as sand-fly fever and dengue are the most 
likely to be confused with it. 

Although malaria is often of all diseases the one in which 
an early and accurate diagnosis may be expected, yet in some 
cases, especially sub tertian or when suppressive drugs have 
been taken, parasites may be absent from the peripheral blood. 
In such cases treatment must be started at once without 
waiting for proof of the diagnosis. 

If it has not been possible to make the diagnosis by blood 
examination, the Tesponse to quinine may supply it. When a 
fever continues in the absence of parasites and despite the 
administration of quinine, it is unlikely to be malaria. In such 
cases the urine should be tested to ensure that the quinine is 
being absorbed. On the other hand there are many short fevers 
which will appear to respond to quinine, since the temperature 
drops in any case after two or tliree days whether quinine is 
given or not. Other acute fevers may occur in a patient with 
chronic or latent malaria, so that the discovery of parasites 
may not supply the wiiole diagnosis. 

Treatment. — There are three drugs that are specific in 
malaria — quinine, atebrin and plasmoquine.* Broadly speak- 
ing the first two have a similar action in relieving sjTiiptoms 
and controlling the temperature by destroying asexual para- 
sites, quinine acting rather more rapidly than atebrin. 
Plasmoquine appears to reduce the liability to relapse and, 
by a selective action on the sexual forms or gametocytes 
(especially of P, falciparum ), — reduces infectivity to mos- 
quitoes — an important point when treating cases in endemic 
areas. No one course of treatment can be laid down 
which is best or even suitable for every case, but from what 
has been said it will be appai*ent that quinine or atebrin 
should be given in the acute stage and should be followed by 
plasmoquine. 

Quinine may be given concinrently or in combination 
with either atebrin or plasmoquine, indeed it seems to increase 

* Atebrin and Plasmoquine are synthetic preparations originally producoti 
in Germany. They are now being manufactured in England under these and 
various other names. Atebrin — Quinacrine, Mepaorino hydrochloride. Atebrin 
musonate (for intramuscular injection) =Quinacri no soluble, Mepacrino methane 
sulphonate. Plasmoquine ^ Pr»quine, Pamaquin. 


12 



178 TROPICAL DISEASES 

the efficacy and to lessen the toxicity of the latter, but atebrin 
and plasmoquine should never be prescribed concurrently, 
as each appears to enhance the toxicity of the other. If both 
drugs are available atebrin should be given first, and a 
few days should be allowed to elapse before plasmoquine is 
started. There is a growing tendency to give a large initial 
dose of atebrin up to 0*6 or even 0*9 grm. and then to continue 
with the routine doses of O-l grm. The object is to raise the 
concentration of the drug in the body rapidly. 

It should be borne in mind that all these drugs are toxic 
and that when they are administered in quantities sufficient to 
kill the parasites they are liable to have certain unpleasant 
and even dangerous effects on the patient. Quinine in thera- 
peutic doses nearly always causes nausea and tinnitus while 
vomiting, palpitations, deafness and cutaneous eruptions may 
result. In rare cases of idiosyncrasy to the drug amblyopia 
and haemoglobinuria may occur. Atebrin, probably the least 
toxic of the anti-malarial drugs, often causes a yellow staining 
of the skin (not jaundice) and, rarely, abdominal pain, diarrhoea 
and vomiting. Plasmoquine may cause cyanosis due to 
methaemoglobinaemia, especially if administered for more than 
five or six days at a time, and should l>e used with very 
great caution in patients over forty. In alcoholics and in 
the subjects of hepatic or renal insufficiency plasmoquine 
should not be used. 

Quinine should be given in solution and never in solid form. 
When given by mouth it is immaterial which salt is used, but 
the sulphate requires the addition of acid to effect solution. 
Owing to its relative insolubihty it is unsuitable for parenteral 
administration for which the bihydrochloride should be used. 
Each dose of quinine should be preceded by a dose of an alkaline 
mixture containing 60 gr. of sodium bicarbonate and 40 gr, of 
sodium citrate to lessen the risk of acidosis and cinchonism. 

It cannot be too strongly emphasised that, in a severely ill 
patient in whom malaria is a possibility, quinine must be given 
at once. To postpone treatment in such a case until parasites 
have been found will result sooner or later in a fatality. More- 
over, where the clinical urgency of the case demands the 
immediate administration of quinine it also demands the more 
rapid absorption obtained by intravenous or intramuscular 
injection. 

Treatment ol Acute Malaria. — An initial dose of calomel 
followed by salts should be given to open the bowels, and pulv. 
A.P.C. (Tab. Acid. Acetylsalicyl. Co. B.P.C.) should be ad- 
ministered to relieve headache and encourage sweating. 



MALARIA 179 

If quinine alone is available the following course is recom- 
mended : — 

10 gr. t.d.s. till the temperature has been normal for forty- 
eight hours. 

10 gr. b.d. for a week. 

A week’s rest from treatment. 

10 gr. b.d. for a week. 

If other drugs are available a combined course should be 
given as follows : — 

Quinine, 10 gr., three times a day until the temperature 
has been normal for forty-eight hours. 

For the next five days atebrin one tablet (0*1 grm.) three 
times a day. The tablets should be swallowed whole 
and should be taken after food. 

For the next two days no treatment. 

For four days plasmoquine one tablet (0 01 grm.) three times 
a day and quinine, 5 gr., twice a day. The same results 
may be achieved by using either plasmoquine compound 
or quinoplasmine, both of which contain quinine as well 
as plasmoquine. 

This course may need to be repeated in part or in whole 
and should be followed by a period of light duty on an iron 
and arsenic tonic. It may need modification to suit individual 
cases. Alkalis and glucose should be given. 

Intravenous quinine may be given in very heavy infections, 
in malignant malaria and in cases where the ^ug is not retained 
when given by the mouth. The dose is 10 gr., and it should be 
diluted in at least 10 c.c. of saline, distilled water or 5 per cent, 
glucose and injected slowly. Repetition is seldom necessary, 
further treatment being given by mouth. 

Intramuscular quinine has many disadvantages and few 
advantages over the intravenous route, but when veins are 
collapsed or when the operator is inexperienced ititramuscular 
medication may be preferable. Moreover the sudden destruc- 
tion of such a large number of parasites as is effected by 
intravenous quinine may liberate a dangerous or even fatal 
amount of toxin into the blood stream. Intramuscular in- 
jections must be given deep into the gluteal muscles and great 
care must be taken to avoid the sciatic nerve. The dose is 
8 to 10 gr. of the bihydrochloride dissolved in 2 to 4 c.c. of 
sterile water or saline and may be repeated as necessary. 
Because the intramuscular injection of quinine always produces 
some degree of local necrosis, the strictest aseptic precautions 



180 TROPICAL DISEASES 

are essential. Atebrin musonate (mepacrinae methanosulphonas) 
may be given intramuscularly as an alternative to quinine. 
The contents of an ampoule (0*375 grm.) are dissolved in 2 to 
4 c.c. of doubly distilled water. 

Treatment of Chronic Malaria. — Every attack of malaria, 
whether it be a primary attack or a relapse, should be adequately 
treated as it occurs. If this is done there is rarely any justi- 
fication for the prolonged courses of treatment that used to be 
prescribed in the hope that further relapses might thus be 
avoided. Adrenalin or neoarsphenamine (0*45 grm. weekly) 
may be used in chronic or obstinate cases. These drugs cause 
contraction of the spleen and the release into the circulation 
of parasites contained in it, thus rendering them accessible to 
the specific plasmodicidal drugs. 

The svlphoimmides have so far failed to earn a place among 
the anti-malarial drugs. 

All cases of malaria must be nursed under a net and should 
receive a course of treatment immediately before arrival in a 
cold climate. 


BLACKVVATER FEVER 

Blackwater fever is characterised by an acute haemolysis 
of the red blood cells resulting in a haemoglobinaemia and, 
when the renal threshold has been overcome, haemoglobinuria 
or blackwater. 

The geographical distribution is superimposed on that of 
malaria, but is far more limited, occurring only in certain of 
those areas where severe malaria is prevalent. The reasons for 
the localised distribution and for the occurrence of haemolysis 
are not known. Although a few authorities still think that a 
specific organism (possibly tick-bome) may l)e responsible, 
it is now generally agreed that malaria, especially severe and 
repeated att&cks of subtertian, is the essential aetiological factor, 
and that all drugs that are specific in the treatment of malaria, 
especially quinine, may predispose to the condition. It is 
rarely seen in persons who have lived in endemic areas for less 
than a year, but may occur within a year after leaving them. 
Quinine alone may cause haemoglobinuria but not blackwater 
fever, and the disease has been reported in persons who have 
never taken quinine, but it has never been known to occur 
in persons who have not lived in highly malarial districts. 
It may be stated with certainty that the disease nearly always 
follows heavy and repeated infections with subtertian malaria 



LEISHMANIASIS 


181 


that have been irregularly or insulficiently treated, although 
it may not be possible to find malarial parasites in the blood 
once the disease has supervened. 

The main symptoms are those of a malarial attack with 
severe and sudden haemolytic anaemia which may involve 50 
per cent, of the red cells. This extensive haemolysis results in 
the plugging of the renal tubules by insoluble acid haematin 
and may le^ to anuria, uraemia and death. The urine, which 
is scanty with abundant albumen and casts, varies in colour 
from red to brown or black. There is usually vomiting and 
epigastric pain. The liver and spleen enlarge as the reticulo- 
endothelial system attempts to deal with the products of 
haemolysis. By the fourth day the haemoglobinuria lessens 
and the temperature falls, but relapses may occur. Hyper- 
pyrexia, delirium, persistent vomiting, hi(?cup, profuse diarrhoea 
and oliguria are bad prognostic signs. Mortality varies from 
10 to 50 per cent. 

There is no specific treatment. Careful nursing is of supreme 
importance, and the patient should be kept warm in bed and 
should not be moved. Repeated transfusions of compatible 
blood up to half a htre on each occasion should be given from 
the start when facilities exist. To guard against anuria and 
acidosis large amounts of fluid should be administered with 
massive doses of sodium citrate and bicarbonate. Renal 
obstruction and damage are minimised if the urine can be kept 
alkaline. Hot fomentations may be applied over the kidneys 
and caffeine citrate in a dose of 2 gr. twice a day may be used 
as a diuretic. If symptoms are severe, intravenous injections 
of glucose (5 per cent.) or sodium bicarbonate (150 gr. to the 
pint of distilled water) are indicated. Quinine should be with- 
held, but if parasites are found to be present during the course 
of the disease, full doses of atebrin should be given, and a 
course of atebrin should be given as a routine during convales- 
cence. If possible the patient should leave the endemic area 
as soon as he is fit to travel and should not return. One attack 
of blackwater fever predisposes to others w hich tend to increase 
in severity. 


LEISHMANIASIS 

Leishmaniasis occurs in two forms, one generalised, the 
other localised. Both are caused by various morphologically 
indistinguishable species of Leishmania, minute protozoa 
closely related to the Trypanosomes, which are transmitted 
by PhXeboUmi (“ sandflies ”). 



182 TROPICAL DISEASES 

Generalised Leishmaniasis. (Kala Azar.) 

Kala Azar is a chronic febrile disease caused by Leishmania 
doncyvani. It occurs most commonly in India and China, but 
also in Africa, South-eastern Europe and South America. On 
the Mediterranean littoral infants and yoimg children are 
especially affected, and the disease is called Ponos or Infantile 
Kala Azar, while the causative organism is referred to as L. 
infantum. In this area dogs are frequently infected and may 
act as reservoirs of infection. 

Signs and Symptoms . — The onset may be sudden or insidious. 
There is chronic fever which typically shows two peaks in the 
twenty-four hours with long periodical apyrexial intervals. 
The spleen is enormously enlarged and the liver to a lesser 
degree, causing a great increase in the size of the abdomen 
in striking contrast to the wasting of the chest and hmbs. A 
marked leucopenia accompanies a progressive anaemia with 
normal colour index, and haemorrhages may occur. In 
Europeans the skin develops an earthy tint and may show 
areas of dusky pigmentation. The patient generally feels 
surprisingly Well and has a clean tongue and a good appetite, 
although his temperature may be appreciably raised. Some- 
times depigmented patches occur on the skin and are later re- 
placed by nodules (post kala azar dermal leishmanoid) which 
may closely resemble leprosy. After many months or years 
the untreated patient dies of exhaustion or intercurrent disease 
to which the leucopenia renders him particularly liable. 

Laboratory diagnosis rests on the discovery of Leishmania 
in blood smears (which will show normal leucocytes and will 
thus exclude a leukaemia), in smears made from pulp obtained 
by splenic puncture, or in cultures made from these fluids. 
Sternal or tibial puncture may also be employed. In Kala 
Azar one drop of commercial formalin added to 1 c.c. of the 
patient’s serum causes it to set into a firm opaque jelly within 
a few minutes. This so-called “ aldehyde test ” is, however, 
no substitute for microscopical diagnosis. 

Pathology . — The essential fact in the pathology of Kala 
Azar is the parasitisation and proliferation of the cells of the 
reticulo-endothelial system. 

Treatment . — Antimony is a specific remedy. Tartar emetic 
(sodium antimony tartrate) in doses not exceeding 2 gr. may 
be given intravenously in 2 per cent, solution on alternate days 
for six to eight weeks, but one of the numerous proprietary 
pentavalent preparations of antimony is now generally used 
(Neostam, Neostibosan, solustibosan, urea stibamine, etc.). 



TRYPANOSOMIASIS 1 83 

Several of the aromatic diamidines (e.gr., Stilbamidine, M & B 
744) have recently been used with success. 

Treatment must be continued until smears and cultures 
are consistently negative, fever is absent, the spleen is normal 
in size, the blood picture is normal and the patient is putting 
on weight. 

Localised Leishmaniasis 

1. Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (Oriental Sore) occurs in Asia, 
Africa, South-eastern Europe, South America and Australia, 
but is most common in limited areas of India, Iraq, Syria, 
Palestine, Iran, Arabia and North Africa, where it has many 
local synonyms. It is noteworthy that oriental sore and Kala 
Azar rarely occur in the same geographical area. It is a localised, 
specific, ulcerating granuloma of the skin of exposed parts of 
the body and is caused by L, tropica. The sore commences as 
a minute, itching papule, single or multiple. Later it becomes 
indurated and covered by a scaly crust which is frequently 
scratched off, uncovering a shallow, indolent ulcer an inch or 
more in diameter. After three to twelve months slow healing 
occurs, leaving a depressed scar. A considerable degree of 
immunity results. L, tropica can be found in serum withdrawn 
in a capillary pipette from beneath the edge of the sore. A 
course of one of the pentavalent antimony compounds is the 
best treatment when the sores are multiple. Locally, when 
secondary infection has been dealt with, cignolin or 2 per cent, 
antimony ointment may be applied, or emetine or berberine 
may be injected into the edge of the sore. X-rays, ionisation or 
carbon dioxide snow may be used. Recently good results have 
been claimed for the local application of sulphapyridine. 

2. Nasopharsmgeal Leishmaniasis (Espundia) occurs only in 
limited areas of South America and is due to infection with 
L, brazilensis. It causes infiltrating sores of the mucous 
membrane of the mouth and nose, which, though they may 
heal temporarily, eventually fungate and cause great local 
destruction. Death from exhaustion or intercurrent disease 
follows months or years of great suffering, but the condition is 
amenable to treatment by antimony. 

TRYPANOSOMIASIS 

African trypanosomiasis (the final stage of which is often 
called Sleeping Sickness) is confined to tropical Africa, in 
certain districts of which it is widespread and very fatal, de- 
populating large areas and causing great desolation. 



184 


TROPICAL DISEASES 


It is caused by trypanosomes — small flagellate protozoa 
which infect the blood and are transmitted from man to man 
by the bite of tsetse flies. Many wild animals are similarly 
infected and act as a reservoir of the disease. 

Two main types of the disease occur and are caused by 
trypanosomes of Afferent but morphologically indistinguishable 
si)ecies transmitted by different species of tsetse flies. 

The trypanosomiasis of the Belgian Congo, the Cameroons 
and the Gold Coast is caused by Trypanosoma gambiense and 
is transmitted by Glossina palpalis and Olossina tachmoides. 
The disease runs a relatively mild course. The trypanosomiasis 
of Rhodesia and Mozambique is caused by T. rhodesiense and 
is transmitted by G. morsitans. In Tanganyika both forms 
occur. 

Symptoms. — About six weeks after being bitten by an 
infected tsetse fly the patient starts to have an irregular inter- 
mittent fever with various erythematous eruptions and localised 
cedema and hyperaesthesia. Later there is a general enlarge- 
ment of the lymphatic glands, especially in the neck, and of 
the hver and spleen, and respiration and pulse-rate are quickened 
and there is thoracic pain. These sj^mptoins may continue 
for months or even years, during which trypanosomes can be 
demonstrated in blood smears. Recovery may take place, 
but more often the cerebrospinal system is invaded and 
trypanosomes are present in the brain and cerebrospinal fluid. 
Although various psychical and even maniacal symptoms may 
occur at first, the patient gradually becomes increasingly 
lethargic and somnolent, finally lapsing into coma and dying 
from exhaustion or intercurrent disease. 

Diagnosis rests on the demonstration of trypanosomes in 
the blood, lymph glands or cerebrospinal fluid. 

Treatment . — Germanin (Bayer 205), Fourneau 309, or the 
British equivalents Antrypol and Suramin are the most effective 
drugs in the early stages. AU are complex preparations of urea. 
Three 1 grm. doses are given intravenously on alternate days 
and seven more similar doses at weekly intervals. The diami- 
dines (e.^., Pentamidine, M & B 800) have recently l>een success- 
fully used. In the later stages Tryparsamide apj)ear8 to be 
the drug of choice. A combination of these drugs may be used. 
Recently Synthalin, a guanidine compound, has been recom- 
mended, and it seems that this may prove of value in cases 
resistant to arsenic. 

Control and prevention of trypanosomiasis is a huge problem. 
It involves the study of the habits and breeding places of the 
various species of tsetse flies with a view to their destruction 



DYSENTERY 


186 


and of the role of animals as reservoirs of infection. Personal 
prophylaxis is mainly a matter of avoiding the bites of the 
flies, but there is some evidence that injections of Germanin 
(or its equivalents) reduce the severity of the disease if it is 
subsequently acquired, though they do not prevent infection. 

American Trypanosomiasis or Chagas’ disease is restricted 
to limited areas of South America. It is caused by Trypano- 
soma cruziy which is transmitted by the flying bug Triatorm. 
Armadillos form a reservoir of infection. It causes acute 
conjunctivitis, facial oedema and adenitis, fever and enlarge- 
ment of the thyroid gland, liver and spleen. Chronic nervous, 
myxoedematous and cardiac types are described. 

No effective treatment is known. 


DYSENTERY 

Dysentery means the passage of blood and mucus from the 
bowel with accompanying colic or tenesmus. The word is, 
however, generally reserved for two specific diseases, namely, 
bacillary dysentery usually due to Shiga’s, Flexner’s or Sonne’s 
bacillus, and amoebic dysentery due to the protozoon Enta- 
moeba histolytica, (Dysentery due to Sonne’s bacillus is 
described on page 262). 

Bacillary and amoebic dysentery are by no means purely 
tropical diseases, but tend to occur more commonly in the 
tropics because it is there that is found the general disregard 
of sanitation and hygiene that is necessary for their spread. 
In temperate climates dysentery is practical^ limited to 
institutional outbjeaks. 

The flagellate protozoon Giardia (lamblia) intestinalis is a 
fairly common parasite of the small intestine in the tropics. 
It is often associated with and may be the cause of diarrhoea 
and abdominal discomfort. Tlie stools are typicalty bulky and 
of a khaki colour with a peculiar fishy smell. The flagellate 
or its cysts are easily recognised microscopically. A course 
of atebrin similar to that given in malaria rarely fails to cure 
the condition. 

Control ol Dysentery. — The mode of spread and, therefore, 
the control of dysentery are the same whether it is bacillary 
or amoebic. The causative organism is generally transferred 
from faeces to food by the house fly, though contamination of 
food and water by dust and by carriers ” may also be 
important. The disease will therefore occur where there is no 
efficient system for the disposal of faeces or for its protection 



186 TROPICAL DISEASES 

from flies pending disposal, where flies and dust are particularly 
troublesome and food is not adequately protected from them, 
and where drinking water is not sterilised or obtained from a 
reliable source. Control involves the fly-proofing of latrines, 
the prevention of promiscuous defaecation and the disposal 
of faeces (in the absence of a water-carriage system) by 
incineration or sterilisation. Flies should be dealt with by 
abolition of breeding places, the incineration of manure and 
kitchen refuse, and by the use of traps, poisons and fly-papers. 
Food must be protected by thorough fly-proofing of all larders, 
kitchens and dining-rooms, and by the use of gauze covers. 
Food and vegetables that are eaten uncooked should be peeled 
or well washed in a weak solution of potassium permanganate. 
Drinking water, unless its source is above suspicion, must be 
boiled or othermse sterilised. Cooks and waiters should be 
periodical!}^ examined to ensure that they are not ‘‘ carriers,’’ 
and their personal hygiene should be 8ui)ervised. Because of 
the difficulty of applying these measures under active service 
conditions dysentery has always been the scourge of armies in 
times of war and has often been responsible for more casualties 
than have been inflicted by the enemy. 

The spread of the disease by direct contagion is limited 
to communities where the most elementary sanitary principles 
are disregarded, as in native bazaars and lunatic asylums. 
Active immunisation against bacillary dysentery by vaccines 
has not proved successful in the past because of their toxicity, 
but the rcvsults of limited trials of various recently product 
detoxicated vaccines have been promising. A short-lived 
passive immunity may be bestowed by the administration of 
10,000 imits of antitoxin in the case of Shiga infections. 


BACILLARY DYSENTERY 

Bacillary dysentery is an acute epidemic disease caused by 
the invasion of the mucosa of the intestine by B. dyaenterim 
Shiga or by one of the several strains of B. dysenterice Flexner. 
Shiga infections are usually far more severe than Flexner on 
account of the greater degree of toxaemia caused by the former 
organism. 

Pathology. — Generally speaking, dysentery bacilli do not 
occur outside the intestinal canal, and do not invade the 
submucosa. The typical lesions occur in the distal part of the 
large intestine, but may extend to include the lower third of 
the ileum, and are due to the action of the toxins produced by 



BACILLARY DYSENTERY 


187 


the bacilli. In acute dysentery there is at first a general hyper- 
aemia of the mucous membrane and hypersecretion of mucus. 
Later there are submucous haemorrhages and diffuse superficial 
coagulation necrosis with shallow “ snail track ’’ ulceration of 
the transverse folds of the mucosa forming islands of granula- 
tion tissue, serpiginous in outline, surrounded by hyperaemic 
mucous membrane. In severe cases the necrosis may proceed 
to actual gangrene so that the mucous membrane is com- 
pletely destroyed and the gut is contracted into a rigid tube 
containing green or black sloughs. Other organs show the 
signs of acute toxaemia. A mucous colitis often results, and 
a fibrotic, stenosed large intestine may follow. The liability 
to stenosis will be appreciated if it is remembered that in 
bacillary dysentery the ulceration spreads round the gut rather 
than along it. 

Signs and Symptoms. — Mild, catarrhal, ordinary ulcera- 
tive, fulminating, choleraic and relapsing types have been 
described. 

After a short incubation period of something less than a 
week, sudden abdominal pain and an urgent call to stool usher 
in the disease. Thereafter colic increases, the temperature 
rises and the frequent motions become less faecal and contain 
an increasing proportion of mucus and bright red blood 
resembling red currant jelly. Tenesmus, inflammation of the 
anus and even prolapse of the bowel ensue as the motions 
increase up to thirty, forty or even more in twenty-four hours, 
and the colon can be felt if the abdomen is not too tender to 
permit palpation. 

In fulminating cases the stools may resemble ‘‘ meat wash- 
ings,” and may even become serous, while in the most severe 
forms (usually Shiga infections) toxaemia may prove fatal 
before the number and constitution of the stools has caused 
alarm. High fever, the passage of offensive sloughs, delirium 
and hiccup are grave signs. 

A chronic form of the disease is not uncommon after recovery 
from the acute attack and may occur occasionally without an 
acute stage, and is then marked by several daily stools con- 
taining blood and mucus, wasting, dyspepsia and neurasthenia. 
The descending colon is often thickened and palpable. 

Synovitis and arthritis with sterile effusion, especially of the 
knees and ankles, may occur during the acute stage of the 
disease, or more usually during convalescence. Conjunctivitis, 
iritis, pardtitis and peripheral neuritis may also occur as com- 
plications and, as they are the result of toxeemia, are more 
common in Shiga infections. 



188 TROPICAL DISEASES 

Diagnosis. — Amoebic dysentery {vide p. 190), colitis, malig- 
nant disease, diverticulitis, polyposis, and especially malarial 
dysentery, must be borne in mind and excluded. In acute 
bacillary dysentery the stools consist almost entirely of 
bright red blood and viscid mucus and are practically odour- 
less. Microscopically the mucus contains numerous poly- 
morphonuclear leucocytes and red blood cells, a number of 
large macrophage epithelial cells (which are liable to be mistaken 
for Eniama^a histolytica) and scanty non-motile bacilli. There 
is very little faecal material. 

Although a tentative diagnosis can often be made from the 
cellular characteristics of the exudate, final proof must rest on 
culture of the causative organism. It is essential that the 
clinician should realise the importance of submitting a stool 
to the laboratory as early as possible irj^ the disease and as 
soon as possible after it is passed. 

Treatment. — Certain general measures must be adopted 
from the outset in all cases of dysentery without waiting for a 
definite diagnosis. These include strict confinement to bed 
vith the use of a bedpan, starvation diet, initial purgation and 
the replacement of fluid lost from the l>owel. 

An initial dose of an ounce of castor oH or 2 drachms of 
sodium sulphate should be followed by sodium sulphate in 
drachm doses hourly on the first day and two hourly on the 
second. Salines should be continued in decreasing amount 
for another few days until the stools are faeculent again. If 
diarrhoea persists full doses of bismuth carbonate or kaolin 
may be given. Although it is a mistake to persist with salines 
for too long, it is essential to get rid of the invading organisms 
and their toxins before attempting to control the diarrhoea 
with drugs whose action is largely that of a cork. Chlorodyne 
in doses of 20 minims three times a day is useful for the relief 
of pain. Opium and morphia may be given in severe cases. 

Colonic lavage is usually not indicated in the acute stage, 
but a hot (100° to 102° F.) rectal wash-out or an enema of 
starch and opium (30 minims of tincture of opium to 2 or 3 oz. 
of thin starch) may be comforting and may be preceded by the 
introduction of a cocaine and morphia suppository. 

Drugs of the Sulphonamide group have now amply proved 
their effectiveness and have largely replaced continued saline 
purgation. They must, however, be administered as soon as 
blood and mucus appear in the stools. Svlphaguanidine, being 
absorbed only to a small extent by the bowel wall, is the drug 
of choice. An initial dose of 6 grm. should be followed by 
maintenance doses of 3 grm. four-hourly until the stools are 



BACILLARY DYSENTERY 


189 


reduced to about four per day and blood and mucus are absent. 
Thereafter 6 grm. should be given eight-hourly for a further 
three days. A total white cell count should be performed on 
the fourth day of treatment, which rarely needs to be continued 
for more than a week. Svlphapyridine should be used if 
sulphaguanidine is not available. An initial dose of 2 grm. is 
followed by 1 grm. four-hourly (or three-hourly in severe cases) 
for the next few days. A total white cell count should be 
performed on the fourth day in every case where it is necessary 
to continue treatment beyond that period. 

Antitoxic serum should be given as early as possible in the 
disease before the effects of the toxins become operative. It 
is of Uttle use after the third or fourth day. From 20,000 to 
50,000 units of the polyvalent serum should be given intra- 
muscularly according to the severity of the case, and the dose 
may be repeated daily for two or three days. In very severe 
cases it may be given intravenously in 2 pints of sahne or 5 per 
cent, glucose. 

Where Shiga’s bacillus is isolated, or the clinical condition 
causes it to be suspected, the specific serum should be used. 

Diet must be increased very gradually, and not imtil there 
is definite clinical improvement, otherwise relapse is hkely 
to result and the disease may become chronic. For the first 
two or three days only water, barley water, imperial drink and 
tea should be allowed in small quantities at frequent intervals. 
Thereafter arrowroot, Benger’s food, chicken tea, beef tea and 
jeUies should be added cautiousfy so that egg ^ps and milk 
puddings are being taken by the eighth day and a fish diet by 
the tenth. Alcohol must be strictly forbidden during the disease 
and for a month afterwards. 

In chronic cases high colonic lavage on alternate days should 
be combined with a fight diet and a morning saline. To remove 
mucus an initial enema of a pint of warm water containing 
60 gr. of sodium bicarbonate should be given. Half an hour 
later the lavage is given slowly by gravity through a rubber 
urethral catheter. A pint and a half of warm isotonic saline 
should be used and should be retained for ten to fifteen minutes 
during which the patient should assume first the left lateral, 
then the genupectoral and lastly the right lateral position. 
Various medicated retention enemata have been recommended. 
Autogenous vaccines are well worth a trial, and recently a diet 
of apples has been advocated. There is acciunulating evidence 
that in colitis and chronic dysenteric conditions there is a 
general avitaminosis, and the administration of vitamins is 
therefore well worth a trial. 



190 TROPICAL DISEASES 

Joint elBhisions should be aspirated and counter-irritant 
dressings applied. 

It is most important that the stools should be examined 
macroscopically and microscopically throughout the disease 
in order that the condition of the colon may be assessed. 
Everything passed from the bowel must be scrupulously dis- 
infected until repeated cultures prove negative. 


AMOEBIC DYSENTERY 

Amoebic dysentery is a disease of insidious onset and chronic 
course caused by infection of the bowel wall by Entamoeba 
histolytica. Secondary or metastatic amoebiasis (principally of 
the liver) may follow the penetration of the amoebae into the 
tissues and their spread by the blood stream. 

Etiology. — Entamoeba histolytica, in its vegetative or active 
form, is an amoeba about two or three times the size of a poly- 
morphonuclear leucocyte. It possesses the power of amoeboid 
movement, of throwing out pseudopodia which engulf the red 
blood cells, leucocytes and other debris on which it lives and 
of secreting a histolysin which enables it to penetrate the tissues. 
In this form it is extremely delicate and would soon perish 
when passed from the bowel. In unfavourable conditions it 
therefore encysts, and the round quadrinucleate cyst thus 
formed possesses sufficient resistance to desiccation and extremes 
of temperature to allow it to be transferred by the agency of 
“ carriers,’’ flies, water, uncooked food and possibly dust, to 
be ingested by other persons in whose intestine it excysts and 
liberates the active pathogenic amoeba. 

There are other amoebae and their cysts (notably E, coli) 
which occur in the intestine and faeces which are liable to be 
mistaken for E, histolytica, but they are none of them patho- 
genic. 

Pathology. — The amoebae dissolve their way down through 
the mucosa, submucosa and muscular layer where they produce 
small submucous abscesses, so that the mucous membrane 
becomes studded with minute yellow pustules. These little 
abscesses burst and produce ulcers which increase in size and 
become funnel-shaped, the edges being regular and the bases 
covered with sloughs. These ulcers may coalesce and tend to 
spread in the long axis of the gut. They are separated by areas 
of normal mucous membrane. Deeper penetration of the 
amoebas may result in perforation, peritonitis and adhesions 
between adjacent coils of gut or between gut and liver or 



AMOEBIC DYSENTERY 


191 


spleen, while erosion of blood vessels may cause haemorrhages 
and thromboses and the spread of amoebae to distant parts of 
the body with resultant metastases. Amoebic ulceration is 
commonest in the caecum, hepatic flexure and sigmoid colon, 
the lower ileum being only rarely affected. There is general 
compensatory thickening of the gut. Ulceration may become 
chronic and be followed by polyposis and carcinoma. 

Signs and Symptoms. — The incubation period is several 
weeks. The onset is insidious, and often there is no more than 
colic and perhaps mild diarrhoea, indeed death may result 
from perforative peritonitis, or metastatic amoebiasis may 
occur without there having been any dysenteric symptoms. 
Tenesmus is not marked unless the rectum is affected and 
abdominal tenderness is localised and may simulate appendicitis. 
The stools are rarely numerous and consist of faeces flecked 
with mucus and streaked with blood. They are offensive and 
are said to resemble anchovy sauce. There is seldom any 
fever or toxaemia. While gangrenous fulminating cases do 
occur, the disease typically runs a chronic course which often 
does not keep the patient to his bed or even away from his 
work, indeed in the most insidious cases the symptoms may be 
so slight that the suspicion of mahngering may arise, the 
patient being listless and tired and showing nothing clinically 
beyond a mild tachycardia and an occasional extra systole. 
It may fairly be said that the seriousness of amoebic dysentery 
lies not in the dysentery but in the penetrative power of the 
amoebae and the dangers resulting from it. 

Diagnosis. — Microscopic examination of the stools and the 
finding of Enturnoeba histolytica or its cysts can alone supply a 
conclusive diagnosis. For this purpose tmrrn freshly parsed stools 
should be repeatedly examined. Often the detection of the 
amoebae is facilitated by a saline purge, so there is every reason 
for proceeding with the normal initial treatment of dysentfcry. 

Entamoeba coli is not infrequently present in the stools in 
cases of bacillary dysentery. It is therefore iraj)erative that 
the pathologist should be competent to distinguish with 
certainty between these two ammbae and their cysts, or wrong 
diagnosis and treatment may well have fatal results. The points 
of differentiation are beyond the scope of this book and can 
be learned only by the study of fresh specimens, but it may be 
said briefly that E, histolytica is generally smaller and more 
active than E. coli, and while the former often x^ontains in- 
gested red blood oells, the latter never does. The cysts also 
tend to be smaller in the case of E. histolytica and typically 
contain four nuclei in that species, whereas the cysts of E, coli 



192 TROPICAL DISEASES 

contain more than four nuclei. Microscopical examination of 
the stools will also reveal that the red cells tend to show rouleaux 
formation while comparatively few pus cells and macrophages 
are seen, but there are numerous motile bacilli and often a 
number of Charcot-Leyden crystals. 

Sigmoidoscopic examination is often of great help in en- 
abUng the condition of the bowel to be studied, and amoebae 
may often be found in scrapings from the ulcers when it has 
not been possible to find them in the stools. The comparative 
painlessness of sigmoidoscopy in amoebic infections is in itself 
a point of some diagnostic importance. 

Amoebic dysentery is usually accompanied by a moderate 
leucocytosis. 

Treatment. — There are several drugs that are sj)eeific against 
E. histolytica, and all of them possess toxic properties. It is 
therefore wrong to administer any of them unless the diagnosis 
has been estabhshed ; and if laboratory facihties exist, their 
use as diagnostic agents, as quinine is used to diagnose malaria, 
is to be avoided. Of these drugs emetine, an alkaloid of 
ipecacuanha, is the most lethal to the amoebae and the most 
toxic to the patient. 

In acute cases the treatment should follow the general lines 
recommended for bacillary dj’^sentery. Serum should not, of 
course, be given, a single daily saline is usually sufficient and 
the diet may be rather more generous. Emetine hydrochloride 
1 gr. in 1 c.c. of distilled water should be given hypodermically 
on each of the first ten days. It should be remembered that 
emetine is a dangerous remedy for a serious disease and that 
it may affect the heart and occasionally the nervous system 
and the patient must, therefore, be confined to bed and carefully 
watched and nursed. 

After this ten-day treatment the patient should have a 
few days’ rest from active treatment and should then l>e given 
a course of emetine bismixth iodide (E.B.I.). Owing to its 
tendency to cause nausea and vomiting E.B.I. should be given 
last thing in the evening when the patient is going to remain 
undisturbed. Ten to fifteen minims of chlorodyne or tinct. 
opii given half an hour previously may check excessive vomiting. 
E.B.I. should be administered in gelatine capsules in a dosage 
of 1 gr. on the first day, 2 gr. on the second day and 3 gr. on 
each of the subsequent ten days. During this course colonic 
lavage should be given daily with a pint and a half of warm 
water containing 90 gr. of sodium bicarbonate and should l>e 
followed by an enema of 6 to 8 oz. of 2J per cent, ehiniofon * 

* Yatren. Quinoxyi, Quinioaulphan. 



AMCEBlC DYSENTERY 193 

(B.P.) which should be retained for eight to ten hours. The 
rationale of this treatment is that while emetine acts on 
amoebic in the tissues, E.B.I. and chiniofon act on those in 
the lumen of the bowel. 

In resistant or relapsing easels trial should be made of 
stovarsol (acetarsol) or carbasone in doses of 4 gr. twice daily 
for ton days. Chiniofon pills and Kurchi bark and itsnlerivatives 
are also recommended. 

Diet should be light and milk is not contraindicated. 
Alcohol must not be allowed. 

Scrupulous care must be taken to disinfect the stools imtil 
repeated examinations fail to reveal ama3baD or cysts. For 
some time after apparent cure the stools should be |K3riodically 
examined to make sure that the patient does not become a 
" carrier ” or eyst-passer who will be a danger to the community 
and liable to develop any of the various amoebic metastases. 

Because the diagnosis between bacillary and amoebic 
dysentery is of such supreme importance and because con- 
fusion has in the i)ast so often led to unnecessary loss of life, 
the main |)oints of distinction are summarised below : — 


BaciUary Dysentery 

An iKMito, opitlemic fobrilo diseaso 
of nlioi't (iurution and sudden onset 
occurring moat commonly in dry 
climatea and having an incubation 
period of not more than a week. 

The tongue in clean, toxaemia is 
marked, and tenesmus common. There 
is general abdominal tenderness. 

The stools are scanty, numerous, 
o<lourle8.s, alkaline, and consist almost 
entirt‘Jy of blood and mucus — “ red 
currant jelly.” Microscopically red blood 
cells and polymorphonuclears are 
numerous, macrophage cells aro plenti- 
ful, and organisms scanty and consist 
maiidy of non-motile bacilli. 

Leucocytosis is uimsual. 

Ulcers, when present, are shallow, 
with serpiginous outline, the bases 
consisting of granulation tissue. They 
tend to occur on the free edges of the 
trajisverso folds of the gut. The whole 
mucous membrane is hyperaomio or 
necrosed. 

The only imiK)rtant complioatioiis on^ 
arthritis and iritis. Chronic colitis and 
stenosis may follow. 


Amcebic Dysentery 

A sub-acute or chronic, endemic, 
afebrile distMise of long duration and in- 
sidious onset occurring most conxmonly 
in humid climates and having an in- 
cubation perioil of throe to twelve weoks. 

The tongue is dirty, toxaemia is not 
marked, and tenesmus is unusual. 
There is locaUsed abdominal tenderness. 

The stools are large, not very numer- 
ous, offensive, atnd, and consist of 
fsecal material streaked with bUnxl and 
mucus — “ anchovy sauce.” Micro- 
sc^opically rt'd bhxMl cells occur in 
clumps, |>olymorphonuclears are dam- 
aged, macrophages are not common. 
Charcot- Leyden crystals arc often seen 
and there are numerous motile bo^'iUi. 

Leucocytosis is the rule. 

Ulcers are deep and funnel-shaped 
with a regular outline, the biases con- 
sisting of sloughs. They occur in the 
long axis of the gut. Intervening 
mucous membrane is normal. 


Apart from imminliate dangers such 
as perforation, peritonitis, and hajmor- 
rhages, the only common complication 
is hei)atitis and liver abscess. 



TROPICAL DISEASES 


ld4 


Metastatic Amcebiasis 

During the course of amoebic infection of the intestine, 
invasion of the skin aroinid the anus may occur, and the same 
thing may happen round a colostomy or appendicectomy 
wound resulting in a spreading ulceration. Such conditions 
respond readil}^ to emetine. The true metastatic lesions resulting 
from the primary infection of the gut are, however, blood borne. 
The erosion of a small vessel in the gut wall results in the 
amoebae being carried up the mesenteric and j>ortal veins to the 
liver which is by far the commonest site of such lesions. 
Amoebiasis of the brain, spleen, and lung may occur. 

Amoebic Hepatitis and Liver Abscess 

The great majority of untreated cases of metastatic 
amoebiasis take the form of an abscess, more often single than 
multiple, in the right lobe of the liver, though early diagnosis 
and treatment may arrest the condition in the stage of 
hepatitis which precedes it. Tlie disease is rare in natives and 
in European women and children. 

It should be remembered that although there is alwaj^s a 
primary infection of the gut this may have caused such mild 
symptoms that no history of dysentery is obtainable, and the 
absence of such history must never cause the jX)S8ibilit3^ of hepatic 
amoebiasis to be overlooked in any case of debility or chronic ill- 
health in a person who has lived in the tropics. The condition 
may arise as long as twenty years after the primary infection. 

Symptoms, Signs and Diagnosis . — The existence of malaise, 
irritability, loss of weight and appetite, coated tongue and 
irregular action of the bowels in one who has lived in a country 
where amoebiasis is endemic should never fail to arouse suspicion. 
If to these symptoms be added a muddy complexion, evening 
pyrexia and night sweats, heaviness or pain in the right hypo- 
chondrium and a dry irritative cough, the diagnosis can hardly 
be in doubt. Pain may be referred to the right shoulder or to 
the appendicular region, and physical examination may show 
enlargement of the hver and signs of pleural involvement or right 
basal pneumonia. Diminution of movement of the diaphragm 
and deformity of its right dome may be seen in radiographs, and 
when accompanied by a moderate leucocytosis with a relatively 
normal lymphocyte : polymorphonuclear ratio, it is presumptive 
evidence of the existence of a fully developed abscess and may 
be confirmed by aspiration. Amoebae, though present in the 
growing edge of the abscess, are not often found in the “ pus.” 



CHOLERA 


195 


Sufficient thought must be given to differential diagnosis 
to prevent the possibility of overlooking hepatic enlargement 
due to malaria, hydatid cyst, gumma, malignant disease and 
kala azar, but exploratory puncture is generally a justifiable 
confirmatory measure. In acute cases with congestion it is 
often advisable to postpone this step until a course of emetine 
has failed to reduce the temperature and the leucocytosis. 
Aspiration should be performed under local or general anaesthesia 
with a wide bore cannula and ample suction, the site of election 
being, in the absence of localising signs, a point in the eighth 
or ninth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line. The 
needle should be introduced inwards and slightly upwards and 
backwards for a distance of three to three and a half inches. 
Several punctures should be made before abandoning the 
attempt. The stools should always be carefully and repeatedly 
examined for amoebic cysts. 

If untreated an amoebic abscess may burst into the lung, 
pleura, pericardium or peritoneum, or may become secondarily 
infected. Adequate treatment reduces the mortality from 
about 70 per cent, to practically niL 

Treatment . — In amoebic hepatitis a course of ten daily 
hyjKDdermic injections of 1 gr. of emetine should be given 
during which the patient must be kept in bed on a low diet. If 
cysts are present in the stools this should be followed by a 
course of emetine bismuth iodide by the mouth and chiniofon 
enemata as in amoebic dysentery. 

Even when an abscess has formed, emetine alone may often 
effect a cure, but as a considerable amount of “ pus ** may be 
present (as much as 6 pints has been recorded) aspiration may 
be necessary in association with a course of emetine. After 
aspiration, 1 or 2 gr. of emetine in 10 c.c. of sterile distilled 
Water should be injected into the abscess c^avity. Aspiration 
may have to be repeated if the cavity fills up again. Strict 
attention to asepsis must be observed or secondary infection 
will inevitably follow. Surgical drainage is to be avoided and 
open operation is rarely justified. 


CHOLERA 

iEtiology and Epidemiology. — The disease is caused by the 
comma-shaped Vibrio cholerce which infects the mucosa of 
the small intestine and produces a potent endotoxin. The 
vibrio is usually ingested in water contaminated by persons 
suffering from the disease or carrying the organism during 



196 TROPICAL DISEASES 

convalescence. Healthy carriers are rare. Leas commonly 
the disease is contracted eating food (especially raw fruit 
or vegetables) which in turn has been contaminated by water, 
a earner or dies. India is the endemic focus from which the 
disease spreads along the routes taken by traders and pilgrims 
to all parts of Asia. It is now well over half a century since 
the disease occurred in the British Isles or America. Although 
a certain minimum atmospheric humidity is necessary, the 
spread of an epidemic depends chiefly on the existence of 
insanitary conditions, and it is to the eradication of these 
conditions that Western Europe owes its comparatively new- 
found freedom from the disease. 

Pathology. — The multiplication of the vibrio in the small 
intestine and the liberation of toxins cause a hyi)eriemia and, 
later, a superficial necrosis of the mucous membrane and 
the loss of large quantities of fluid from the bowel. Severe 
dehydration ensues involving hauno-concentration, lowering of 
blood pressure, muscular cramps, suppression of urine and 
uraemia. The loss of salts from the blood causes acidosis. 
These effects are aggravated by the action of the absorbed 
toxins which themselves cause a fall in blood pressure and 
damage to the secreting tubules of the kidneys. 

Signs and Symptoms. — After an incubation period which 
varies from a few hours to about a week, and with or without 
premonitory diarrheea, the disease sets in with the passage (if 
profuse and frequent motions often accompanied by colic. 
The motions, at first ficcal, rapidly lose their colour and assume 
the tjqiical “ rice water ’’ appearance — watery fluid containing 
flakes of necrosed intestinal epithelium. In this, the sUige of 
eoacuciiion, enormous quantities of this fluid are lost both by 
diarrhoea and vomiting. As the fluid contains the vibrio the 
attendants run a considerable risk of being infected. Dehydra- 
tion produces intense thirst, the urine diminishes in amount, 
the blood pressure falls, the pulse becomes small and thready, 
the temperature drops, and the patient passes into the algid 
stage. The eyes are sunken, the intra-ocular tension is reduced, 
and the eyelids pearly white. The skin become^s clammy and 
wrinkled (“ washer-woman’s fingers ”) and of an earthy hue, 
often with cyanosis at the extremities. The surface temperature 
and the blood pressure drop still further and the pulse may be 
barely perceptible. Severe and agonising cramps in the calves 
occur, and the patient, although fully conscious, cannot speak 
above a husky whisper. The urine may be completely sup- 
pressed. If a vein be opene<l only a small bead of dark tarry 
blood may exude, the specific gravity of which may exceed 



CHOLERA 


197 


1*070 as compared with the normal 1*058. It is in this stage, 
often within twenty-four to thirty-six hours of the onset of 
the disease, that death is most likely to occur either in coma 
or after sudden collapse. 

Recovery is heralded by a general remission of symptoms 
which constitutes the stage of reaction. The motions decrease 
in number and volume, and bile reappears in them. The 
temperature rises and may become hyperpyrexial, the pulse 
improves, urine is secreted, and the skin regains its normal 
appearance. Recovery is usually surprisingly rapid having 
regard to the seriousness of the disease, but in this stage the 
patient is by no means out of danger, and death may occur 
from pneumonia, hyperpyrexia, or uraemia. Convalescence is 
apt to be comphcated by anaemia, toxic nephritis, chronic 
enterocolitis, furunculosis, insomnia, and mental depression. 

In addition to the classical cholera described above, am- 
bulatory cases may occur (especially late in an epidemic), and 
may suffer from little more than malaise and diarrhoea. On the 
other hand, severe, fulminating cases are sometimes seen in 
which death from toxaemia occurs before diarrhoea or vomiting 
have made their appearance, the so-called ‘‘ cholera sicca.” 

Mortality in treated cases varies from 20 to 50 per cent. 

Diagnosis. — This rests finally on the demonstration of 
Vibrio cholerce in the evacuations by cultural and biochemical 
methods. Once an epidemic is well estabhshed diagnosis 
presents no difficulty, but in the earlier or sporadic cases 
bacillary dysentery, malignant malaria, and food poisoning 
must be excluded. In malaria the temperature is high, and in 
food poisoning the vomiting precedes the diarrhoea, whereas 
in cholera it follows it. It should be remembered that dysentery, 
enteric fever, or malaria may co-exist with cholera. 

Treatment. — This aims to replace fluid loss, to neutralise 
acidosis, and to destroy toxins. 

Throughout the disease the temperature must be carefully 
watched and the urine must be measured. The patient must 
be kept warm and should wear a cholera belt.” Food should 
be withheld altogether until the choleraic diarrhoea ceases, but 
unlimited boiled water “ pinked ” with potassium perman- 
ganate (3 gr. to the pint) should be allowed, and potassium 
permanganate in pill form should bo administered until the 
stools become and remain green. As much as 50 gr. may be 
given in the twenty-four hours to oxidise the toxins. Kaolin 
in a strength of 1 to 3 in water may be swallowed in large 
quantities and acts by adsorbing the toxins. To check purging 
and vomiting it is wise to give, from the outset, eight or nine 



198 


TROPICAL DISEASES 


half-hourly doses of essential oils — clove, cajaput, and juniper, 
5 minims of each, with 30 minims of spt. aether, and 15 minims 
of acid sulph. arom. Bacteriophage and antitoxic serum, 
although somewhat uncertain in their action, are worth a trial, 
but they must be given immediately symptoms appear. 

The essential treatment in cholera, however, is the replace- 
ment of fluid and salts. This should be effected by the slow 
intravenous infusion of two solutions of saline, one alkaline, 
the other hypertonic. The alkaline solution consists of 90 gr. 
of sodium chloride and 160 gr. of sodium bicarbonate in a pint 
of sterile distilled water. The hypertonic solution consists of 
120 gr. of sodium chloride, 6 gr. of potassium chloride, and 4 gr. 
of calcium chloride to the pint. One pint of the alkaline solution 
is followed by as many pints of the hypertonic solution as are 
indicated by the degree of dehydration. As a general rule a 
pint is required for every unit by which the specific gravity 
of the blood exceeds 1 *060 up to a maximum of 6 pints. Thus 
a blood specific gravity of 1 *063 calls for the infusion of 3 pints, 
one of alkaline and two of hypertonic sahne, indicates that 
about half the fluid of the body has been lost and corresix)nd8 
to a systolic blood pressure of about 70 mm. Hg. Where no 
facilities exist for such estimations or for preparing these 
special solutions, 3 or 4 pints of normal saline should be given. 
Infusion may need to be repeated if the blood pressure remains 
low or collapse still threatens. If there is anuria a pint of 
normal saline should be given by the rectum every two hours, 
and fomentations should be applied over the loins. 

The hypodermic injection of drugs is to be avoided in the 
algid stage as they are liable to have a dangerous cumulative 
effect when the circulation improves during the stage of reaction, 
but pituitrin, digitalin, atropine, or adrenalin may be necessary 
to combat severe collapse or anuria. Oamps may be relieved 
by massage, warmth, or short chloroform inhalations. 

In the stage of reaction bismuth salicylate in 15 gr. doses 
may control continued purging. Convalescence must not be 
hurried and diet must be increased with the greatest care. 

Prophylaxis. — Personal . — Inoculation with cholera vaccine 
gives a reasonable degree of protection for a few months. 
All water used for drinking or in the preparation of food should 
be boiled or chlorinated. Salads and fruit should be avoided 
altogether or soaked for two hours in 1 : 8,000 potassium per- 
manganate. Melons and cucumters are particularly dangerous. 
A daily dose of essential oils is a useful preventive. Every 
effort should bo made to avoid anything likely to upset the 
digestive tract, not excluding purgatives. 



SPRUE 


199 


Oeneral . — Cholera patients must be isolated for six weeks 
or xmtil the stools are free from the vibrio, and during this 
time all dejecta as well as all soiled clothes or bed-linen must 
be thoroughly disinfected. Carriers should be sought out and 
contacts isolated for ten days. 

Water supphes must be carefully supervised and some sure 
method of sterilisation practised. Access of flies to infected 
material and to food must be prevented. 


SPRUE 

Sprue is a chronic disease of variable symptomatology, but 
in typical cases dyspepsia, abdominal distension and diarrhoea, 
glossitis, and anaemia are present. It occurs in those who live 
or have lived in certain tropical or subtropical areas, especially 
India and Ceylon, China, the East and West Indies, and Central 
America. It bears a close relationship to ccehac disease and idio- 
pathic steatorrhoea (which has been called “ non-tropical sprue ”). 

Sprue is probably a deficiency disease, the essential fact in 
the aetiology being impairment of absorption from the small 
intestine consequent on atrophy of the mucous membrane. 
The cause of this atrophy is not known and is the subject of 
much speculation. The impairment of absorption embraces 
fats, glucose, calcium, iron, vitamins, and the extrinsic anti- 
anaemic factor. A consideration of the results of the failure to 
absorb these substances will explain the symptoms. 

Symptoms are insidious in onset and follow an uncertain 
but prolonged incubation period. Only in fuUy developed cases 
are all the symptoms likely to be seen, and, moreover, their 
severity varies greatly. Irritability, flatulent dyspepsia, and 
morning diarrhoea are among the earliest manifestations. The 
stools are large, pale, gaseous and foul smelling, and may 
contain twice the normal proportion of fat, which is, however, 
coini)letely split. Soreness of the tongue with thinning of the 
mucous membrane and atrophy of the filiform papillae is a 
common and distressing feature. Meteorism, cramps, and 
tetany may occur, and a megalocytic anaemia may develop 
which is indistinguishable from true pernicious anaemia. There 
may be achlorhydria but rarely a complete achyfia. In late 
oases peripheral neuritis and signs of subacute combined 
degeneration of the cord may appear, and in untreated cases 
death follows increasing debility and emaciation. - 

Treatment , — There is no specific remedy. The object of 
treatment must be to give complete bodily rest and to administer 



200 TROPICAL DISEASES 

small frequent feeds of only the most easily absorbed substances, 
Pats and fermentable carbohydrates must, therefore, be reduced 
to a minimum. A milk or high protein diet should be adhered 
to until the condition of the patient and the constitution of 
the stools indicate definite improvement. Fruit, meat juice, 
and liver may be added gradually, but the diet must be carefully 
regulated for at least six months after appai'ent cure. Although 
vitamin therapy has not yet emerged from the experimental 
stage it is a logical treatment, and excellent results have been 
obtained from large doses of the B complex (nicotinic acid and 
riboflavin). The anaemia should be treated with intramuscular 
injections of liver extract and the administration of iron. In 
very advanced cases blood transfusion should be tried. Strict 
but sympathetic nursing is essential, and the patient should 
leave the endemic area as soon as possible. 


YELLOW FEVER 

Yellow fever is a severe, acute, specific disease caused by a 
filterable virus transmitted from man to man by the mosquito 
Aedes cegypti. It is characterised by fever, albuminuria, 
haemorrhages, jaundice, and its peculiarly limited geographical 
distribution. It is a disease that is becoming increasingly 
important epidemiologically as the endemic foci become the 
junctions for more transcontinental air traffic. 

iEtiology and Epidemiology. — The virus circulates in the 
blood of cases of yeUow fever only during the first three days of 
the disease. During this period the virus may be taken up by 
the mosquito which is capable, after an interval of about ten 
days, of transmitting it to susceptible persons in wliom the 
disease develops after an incubation period rarely exceeding 
five days. In this way epidemics are liable to occur whenever 
aedes mosquitoes and susceptible persons exist in sufficient 
numbers. In the meantime, however, the disease is kept alive 
in the form of sporadic and often unrecognised crises among 
natives. In forest areas of South America and probably also 
of Africa the disease exists in a jungle form in cert^iin 
animals amongst which it is transmitted by various forest 
mosquitoes. From this reservoir man may at any time become 
infected if he happens to be bitten by such an infected forest 
mosquito. In urban districts the disease does not occur in the 
absence oi. aedes mosquitoes. These are found all over the 
tropical and sub-tropical world, and yet yellow fever is confined 
to limited areas in South America and tropical Africa. The 



YELLOW FEVER 


201 


spread of the virus to other parts of the world (especially India), 
where the vector and susceptible populations await it, might 
WeU precipitate the most calamitous epidemic the world has 
ever seen. With the development of rapid air and overland 
transport by which many thousand miles can be covered 
within the incubation period, this risk has been greatly in- 
creased, and to meet it the strictest quarantine laws have been 
applied at ports and aerodromes, and elaborate steps have 
been taken to prevent the virus being exported or imported in 
man or mosquito. 

Control of yellow fever depends on the immunisation of all 
persons entering an endemic area, the quarantine of all non- 
immunised persons leaving such areas, the prevention of the 
export of mosquitoes in sea, land or air transport, the early 
recognition and screening of cases of the disease and the local 
elimination of aMes mosquitoes. Since these mosquitoes are 
domestic in their habits and breeding places their destruction 
is not difficult and involves attention to tanks, gutters, tins, 
flower vases, and other collections of stagnant water in which 
they breed. 

Inoculation with attenuated pantropic virus should be 
given to everyone proceeding to an endemic area. Immunity 
follows within a fortnight and lasts for at least eighteen months. 
Mosquito nets should always be used. 

Pathology. — There is jaundice and evidence of widespread 
ha3morrhage8, especially of the stomach and bowel, and general- 
ised fatty degeneration of the organs and vessels. The liver 
is friable and of a “ box-wood ” colour, fatty and hyaline 
degeneration is marked at the periphery of the lobules, and 
there are diagnostic changes in the nuclei and cji^oplasm of 
the liver cells. 

Signs and Symptoms. — Onset is sudden and there is often a 
rigor. For two or three days there is fever with general con- 
gestion, frontal headache, vomiting, epigastric and loin pain, 
and a full rapid pulse. By the third day albumen appears in 
the urine in increasing quantities, the temperatme foils, and 
there is general abatement of symptoms. Convalescence may 
commence at this stage, but more often a stage of reliction 
ensues in which the urine diminishes and albuminuria increases, 
haemorrhages (especially of the stomach and bowel, causing 
black-vomit and melaena) occur and jaundice appears. The 
pulse tends to be slow in relation to the temperature (Faget’s 
sign). In fatal cases toxaemia increases and death occurs 
in coma or convulsions. Abortive, ambulant, severe and 
pernicious types are described. Mortality is about 25 per cent. 



202 


TROPICAL DISEASES 

Diagnosis can be made with absolute certainty only by 
animal inoculation. Clinically the increasing albuminuria and 
falling pulse-rate should arouse suspicion. Jaundice and black 
vomit must not be relied upon as they are usually late feat\u:es. 
In spirochsetosis icterohaemorrhagica there is a leucocytosis, 
whereas a leucopenia usually accompanies yellow fever. 
Malaria, blackwater fever, relapsing fever, and dengue may 
bear a close resemblance. Post-mortem diagnosis by the 
histological appearance of the liver may be of great epidemio- 
logical value in doubtful or sporadic cases. 

The mouse protection test has been of supreme value in 
revealing areas where yellow fever is or has been endemic. 
The test depends on the fact that the blood of an individual 
who has had the disease contains immune bodies which protect 
a mouse when injected with a dose of virus that would otherwise 
prove fatal. By noting the age above which the members of 
an isolated community show positive protection tests it is 
possible to say when an epidemic last occurred. By this means, 
too, the existence of “ jungle yellow fever has been demon- 
strated in man and animals in areas where aides mosquitoes 
do not exist. The test is of no diagnostic value during the 
attack as it becomes positive only during convalescence. 

Treatment is sjTnptomatic, there being no known specific. 
Careful nursing is essential. Alkaline fluids and glucose both 
by the mouth and intravenously are given to combat the 
toxaemia and uraemia. The patient must, of course, be kept 
under a mosquito net. 


DENGUE 

Dengue is a specific fever caused by a virus conveyed by the 
yellow fever mosquito Aides cegypii. The disease, which lasts 
about a week, is apt to occur throughout the littorals of the 
Middle East and elsewhere in epidemics or pandemics, and is 
distinguished by “saddle-back ” temperature chart, skin rash, 
and severe rheumatic-like pains (“ break bone fever. “) 

The blood of the patient is infective to the mosquito for a 
day before the onset of symptoms and for the three following 
days. The mosquito becomes infective ten to fourteen days 
after feeding on a dengue patient. The incubation period is 
five to nine days. 

Symptoms . — The onset is sudden with fever, congestion 
of the skin, supra- and post-orbital pain, suffusion of the 
conjunctivae, and severe pains in the limbs, loins, and back. 
After two or three days the temperature falls and the patient 



TYPHUS FEVER 


203 


feels much better, but after one or two days the fever and 
pains return and the typical rash appears on the hands, hmbs, 
and trunk. It consists of circular, shghtly raised, reddish- 
brown rubeoloid spots which coalesce to give an appearance 
‘‘ midway between scarlet fever and measles.” This terminal 
fever and eruption rarely last more than twenty-four hours. 
Bradycardia and leucopenia with relative lymphocytosis are 
present throughout the disease, which is often followed by 
general debihty, mental depression, insomnia, furunculosis, 
and an immunity of imcertain duration. Mortahty is nil. 

Treatment is symptomatic. The patient must be kept in 
bed under a mosquito net until the temperature is normal and the 
rash has subsided. Morphia may be necessary to lessen the pains. 

Prevention can be effected only by the use of mosquito nets 
and the extermination of aides mosquitoes by swatting and 
spraying and attention to all potential breeding places. 


PHLEBOTOMUS (‘\SANDFLY ”) FEVER 

Sandfly fever is a short specific fever caused by a virus 
transmitted by a midge of the genus Phlebotomns, It occurs 
in most tropical and sub-tropical countries, but especially on 
the Mediterranean littoral. 

Symptoms , — Incubation period is about five days. Fever 
la.sts from three to seven days and is accompanied by con- 
gestion, aching pains in the back and legs and severe frontal 
and post-orbital pain with photophobia. A leucopenia gives 
place to a moderate leucocji/osis when the fever subsides. 

Treatment is symptomatic. The patient must be kept in 
bed under a sandfly net, and opium or Dover’s powder should 
be administered. There is no mortality, but convalescence is 
apt to bo prolonged and complicated if the patient tries to 
fight the disease instead of taking to his bed. 

Prevention depends on the avoidance of sandfly bites by 
the use of nets and suitable clothing after dark, and on the 
destruction of sandflies and their brewing places. 


TYPHUS FEVER 

Typhus fever is really a group of fevers all of which are 
caused by infection with Rickettsia, a pleomorphic virus visible 
with a high-power microscope, which is present in the blood 
during the first few days of the disease. Typhus fever can be 



204 TROPICAL DISEASES 

broadly divided into two main t 3’^|^8 j the cla/ssical epidemic 
typhus which is transmitted by lice from man to man, to 
which fact it owes its epidemic character and its cosmopolitan 
distribution ; and endemic typhus, primarily a disease of 
animals which is accidentally transmitted from them to man 
by ticks, fleas, or mites, and which is localised in various parts 
of the world where the animal reservoir of infection, the vector, 
the climate, and other local peculiarities modify the clinical 
manifestations of the disease. 

Epidemic tyj)hus, being louse borne, is a disease associated 
with war, famine, and destitution, which cause populations to 
neglect personal cleanliness and to crowd together for warmth 
or safety, thus providing conditions ideal for the spread of 
infected lice. It is a disease not of hot climates but of lousy 
populations, and is most common in China, North Africa, and 
Eastern and South-eastern Europe. 

The incubation period is from five to fourteen days. Pro- 
dromal headache and malaise lasting one or two days usually 
precede a sudden rise of temperature to 103° or 104° F. with 
congestion, suffused conjunctiva), and dry, furred tongue. 
The marked degree of prostration occurring within the first 
few days of the disease, with a typical vacant expression, are 
the result of severe toxaemia, and are of diagnostic importance. 
About the fifth day a rash appears on the abdomen and chest, 
and spreads to all parts of the body except the face, which is 
generally spared. The rash is variable in appearance, but 
typically shows roseolar macules superimposed on subcutaneous 
petechiae or mottlings. This rash is the result of necrosis of 
small blood vessels which occurs in the viscera and brain as 
well as in the skin. With the appearance of the rash there is 
an exacerbation of symptoms. Headache becomes severe, 
the tongue is dry and brown, toxaemia increases, and the 
typhus state ” ensues so that the patient becomes feebly 
delirious or comatose with albuminuria, retention of urine, and 
enlargement of the spleen. By the twelfth or fourteenth day 
the temperature falls by crisis or rapid lysis, and recovery 
ensues or deepening coma ends in death from heart failure. 
Complications are not common, but hypostatic pneumonia, 
venous thrombosis, and gangrene may occur, and myocarditis 
may persist into convalescence. Mortahty varies between 
5 and 50 per cent, in different epidemics, and is greatly in- 
creased by debility and advancing age. 

Endemic or zooiic typhus includes Brill’s disease of rats in 
America, Palestine, Australia, and South Africa ; ‘‘ ship fever ” 
of dogs in several Mediterranean ports and ‘‘ urban ” typhus 



RELAPSING FEVER 206 

of rats in Malaya, all transmitted to man by fleas : Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever of North America and ‘‘ tick typhus 
of the Mediterranean, India, Africa, and Brazil, which are 
transmitted by ticks from squirrels and dogs respectively : and 
Japanese river fever and “ scrub ” typhus of Malaya, which 
are transmitted from rats and mice to man by mites. In these 
types the symptoms vary considerably and are much milder 
than in the louse-borne disease, and the prognosis is much 
better. In mite-borne t3q)hus there is local necrosis at the 
site of the bite because the mitea remain buried in the skin. 

Diagnosis , — In sporadic cases the early prostration and 
stupor should arouse suspicion, while the rash should confirm 
it. In epidemics diagnosis is unhkely to be in doubt. The 
Weil-FeUx reaction, which becomes positive by about the 
fifth day and remains so for two months, is of great assistance. 
It depends on the fact that the serum of a typhus patient 
agglutinates Bacillus proteas, and that different serological 
variants of the bacillus are constantly agglutinated in the 
different types of the disease. The organism, although it can 
frequently bo isolated from cases of typhus, has not been shown 
to be any more than a concomitant and causes no specific 
immune bodies to be formed, though such bodies are produced 
by inoculation with B. proleus. Complement fixation and 
intradermal tests have been based on this peculiar phenomenon. 

Treatment is mainly a matter of crareful nursing, as no specific 
drug is known. The hygiene of the mouth is important, and 
cardiac stimulants are usually necessary. Convalescent serum 
and the sulphonamides have recently been exhibited with some 
benefit. 

Prevention is purely a matter of keeping the body and the 
clothes free from lice or of avoiding the bites of fleas, ticks, 
and mites. Various rickettsial vaccines are obtainable but are 
at best only a very subsidiary measure. 


RELAPSING FEVER 

Relapsing fever is an acute specific infectious disease 
characterised by sudden onset, high fever lasting for a few daj’^ 
and sudden defervescence by crisis. During the febrile period 
headache, enlargement of the liver and spleen and leucocytosis, 
and often an erythematous rash, which spreads downwards 
from the neck, are present. Sweating and diarrhma usually 
accompany the crisis. Relapses occur, but the duration of 
both the pyrexial and apyrexial i>eriods varies considerably. 



206 TROPICAL DISEASES 

the symptoms tending to become milder. Mortality is usually 
below 5 per cent., but may be much higher. The disease is 
caused by a spirocha3te (S. recurrentis), demonstrable in blood 
smears during the pyrexial periods only, and transmitted by 
lice and by ticks. 

Louse-borne relapsing fever may occur wherever lice are 
found, and therefore depends more on personal hygiene than 
on chmatic conditions for its existence, becoming epidemic in 
times of war and famine. It is endemic in India, China, and 
Eastern Europe. There are usuaUy two or three relapses, each 
lasting about a week, separated by apjTexial periods of the 
same duration. Prevention is dependent on personal cleanli- 
ness and on the destruction of lice and their eggs. 

Tick-borne relapsivg fever occurs in many tropical countries, 
especially Central and West Africa, North-west India and Iran, 
Spain and Morocco, Cahfomia and Panama. It is a “ place ’’ 
disease, and is most commonly contracted in native rest- 
houses, the tick being parasitic only while itfeeds, thereafter 
dropping off and living in crevices in walls or in the ground. 
This form of the disease therefore remains localised, is little 
affected by season, and never becomes epidemic. The febrile 
j:>eriods are shorter than in the louse-bome form, but relapses 
are hable to be more numerous. Although the Central and 
West African form may be very severe, the tick-bome is, on 
the whole, less severe than the louse-bome variety. Prevention 
depends on the avoidance of tick-infested sites and of their 
bites by the use of a mosquito net. 

Treatment. — A single intravenous injection of 0*45 grm. of 
neoarsphenamine usually effects a complete cure, but it must 
be given during the pyrexial period and never after the tempera- 
ture has fallen. 


PLAGUE 

Plague is an acute specific disease which occurs in epidemic 
form in tropical countries. The main endemic foci are in India 
and China. Severe epidemics have occurred in Europe (as, 
for instance, the Great Plague of London), but are now practi- 
calljr limited to Asia and South America. 

The disease is primarily an epizootic of rats and other 
rodents, and is caused by the Bacillus j)esii8. When rats 
contract the disease the fleas with which they are infested take 
up the bacilli from the rats’ blood. When the rats die of plague 
the infected fleas leave their bodies and seek other warm- 
blooded animals on which to feed, and thus man becomes 



PLAGUE 


207 


infected. Rats, therefore, form the reservoir of the disease, 
and a sudden heavy mortality among rats should be a warning 
of an impending human epidemic. In endemic areas and 
during epidemics rats found dead should never be touched or 
approached closely but should be shovelled into cresol or oil 
and subsequently examined in the laboratory for the presence 
of B, pestis. 

Signs and Symptoms. — The incubation period is from two 
to five days. There are three clinical types of the disease in 
all of which there is marked toxaemia with fever, headache, 
and drowsiness. 

Bubonic plague is characterised by inflammation and 
enlargement (buboes) of those lymph glands which lie in the 
course of the lymphatics draining the site of the flea bites. 
Inguinal buboes are the rule, while axillary and submaxillary 
infections are rare. They are exquisitely tender and frequently 
suppurate. B, pestis can be obtained by gland puncture. 
Mortality varies from 20 to 90 per cent. 

Pneumonic is transmitted by direct droplet infection 

from man to man and not by fleas. The physical signs are those 
of a patchy broncho-pneumonia with blood-stained sputum 
which teems with the bacilli. It is almost invariably fatal 
within a few days. 

Septicoernic plague results from the entrance of large numbers 
of highly virulent bacilli into the blood, and is almost always 
fatal before the lymph glands have time to enlarge. 

An ambulant form (pestis minor) is described, which may 
go unrecognised and consequently be a source of danger to 
others. 

Diagnosis. — Early cases may closely resemble typhus fever. 
Buboes must be differentiated from those of venereal origin 
and from filarial adentitis. Bacteriological diagnosis is a simple 
matter in all forms of the disease. 

Treatment is mainly symptomatic and is unlikely greatly to 
affect the course of the disease. If available, anti-plague serum 
in doses of 100 to 250 c.c. should be given early and repeatedl3^ 
Recently some success has inevitably been claimed for the 
sulphonamides. 

Buboes which suppimate should be incised and dressed with 
iodoform. 

Prevention consists in wholesale destruction of rats and the 
rat-proofing of food and grain stores. Ships I'equiro special 
attention to prevent rats from embarking and disembarking. 
Cases must be strictly isolated for a month and fomites destroyed 
or disinfected. The quarantine period is ten days. 



208 TROPICAL DISEASES 

Personal prophylaxis involves the avoidance of places where 
there are likely to be Heas and immunisation with one of the 
various B, jx^tis vaccines, which, unfortunately, are apt to 
produce severe reactions. 


LEPROSY 

Leprosy is a chronic infective disease characterised by 
granulomatous lesions of the skin and nerves caused by Bacillus 
lepra: {Mycobacivrium leprcc). It is endemic in many tropical 
and sub-tropical countries, but is jnevalcnt only among 
primitive peoples. It is acquired l>y contagion througli intimate 
personal contact over a long jx'riod and is not now thought 
to be hereditary. 

Symptoms , — After an incubation })eriod of several years 
there is prodromal fever of variable severity and duration 
followed by the apjxarance of a ple<jmorphic rash associated 
with loss of hair, which occurs most commonly on the face, 
extensor surl'aces of the limbs, or tlio trunk. The ‘ ))iuiod of 
specific deposit ” follows, during which lejuomata (tumours 
cwisisting mainly of small round (ells and />. hprw and com- 
parable with tubercles in tuberculosis) are formed either in the 
skin or in the peripheral nerve trunks, (^)r, (ucasionally, in both 
situations. In the first instaiu-e nodular or skin leprosy result^s ; 
in the second, ancesthetic or nene leprosy. In skin leprosy 
browni.sh, gre^isy, depilated patches occur which may later 
coalesce to produce, when the face is aflected, the classical 
“ leonine facies,^’ in which the eyes and nasal septum are 
eventmilly affected and the le{)cr dies of intcrcurrent disease. 
In nerve leprosy the destruction of nerve tissue causes localised 
hyperacsthesia and anaesthesia, and, later, muscular atrophy, 
deformities, and trophic ulceration. The disease may jx'rsist 
for many years, being far more chronic than the skin form. 
B. leiw<E can be demonstrated by the methods a[>plicable to 
B. tuberculosis in smears made from the nasal discharge or the 
contents of the leproraata, but B, leprve has not yet been success- 
fully cultured. 

Treatment, — Apart from attention to general health and 
hygiene, wliich is most important, <*haulmoogra or hydnocarpus 
oil, though not specific, offer the best chance of delaying the 
progress of the disease. Among the numerous preparations 
available, sodium hydnocarpate (aIeiK>l) is the most generally 
used, and is administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously 
in doses of 1 to 5 c.c. of a 3 per cent, solution. I.arge doses of 



HABIES m 

potassium iodide are given by mouth. Promising results have 
recently been reported from the injection of diphtheria anti- 
toxin and toxoid. Surgical intervention may be necessary in 
the treatment of comeal involvement, deformities, and leprotic 
ulcers. Lepers, especially those with nasal discharge or open 
sores, should be segregated, and children bom of lepers must 
be separated from them at birth. 


YAWS 

Yaws is a clironic contagious granulomatous disease with 
many similarities to sypliihs (and of which syphilis is possibly 
a neurotropic form) common in tropical Africa, Malaya, the 
West Indies, and elsewhere. It is caused by S^nrochceta pertenzie 
(which is indistinguishable from S, pallida), but is non-venereal 
and is never acquired hereditarily or congenitally. It is 
commoner in children than adults and in males than females. 

Syvipioim , — As in syphilis, there are three stages. A primary 
papule occurs at the site of inoculation and may develop into a 
iiingating granuloma or j^aw ” several centimetres in diameter 
and accompanied by some general constitutional disturbanc^e. 
Several months later a secondary nish and numerous secondary 
yaws appciir which have probably been spread from the primary 
yaw by scratching. Yaws resemble raspberries in apijcarance 
and luive given the disease its synonym fravibie^^ia'' In the 
tertiary sLigc extensive ulceration and bony deformities may 
occur, but visceral and nervous manifestations are unknown. 
The blood gives a positive Wassermann reaction, but the 
cerebrospinal fluid does not, 

Trmimeni. — Neoarsphenamine, preferabl}^ combined with 
bismuth, is specific. 


RABIES 

Rabies is a disease chiefly affecting dogs, wolves, and 
jackals, but occurs also in other animals, including cattle, 
horses, pigs, and cats. It is due to a neurotropic virus which 
invades the central nerv’ous system via the jx^ripheral nerves. 
It is transmitted by the bite of a rabid animal, the saliva of 
which contiiins the \drus. The disease is common in tropical 
countries because of the numerous jackals and pariah dogs that 
are invariably at large there, but it also occurs in the arctic 
countries and all over the world, and has been stamped out in 
Bririiin only by the strictest quarantine regulations. 



210 


TROPICAL DISEASES 

Rabies in ihe dog, because of that animars highly developed 
intelligence, produces marked psychical disturbances. The 
animal becomes morose, irritable, and easily frightened, and 
the bark changes in character. Later conv^ions may occur 
and the dog crawls away to die. It rarely bites man or other 
animals unless they interfere with it. Sometimes the disease 
assumes a paralytic form. It is invariably fatal within ten 
days. 

Rabies in Man , — The incubation period varies with the 
severity and site of the bite, but is generally between three and 
twelve weeks. The patient becomes depressed, irritable, and 
h^^persensitive to all stimuli. Reflex spasms of the organs of 
deglutition occur when attempts are made to eat and esjxjcially 
to drink, and have given the disease, as it occurs in man, the 
s^monym “ hydrophobia.’* Maniacal symptoms and paralysis 
may occur, and, within three days, convulsive seizures give 
place to a rapidly fatal coma. Occasionally the disease may be 
paralj^ic in type from the onset. Consciousness is retained 
almost to the end. 

Treatynent , — No treatment is of any avail once the symptoms 
have developed. 

Prophylaxis , — Wild dogs should be destroyed and steps 
taken to keep pets away from them. In more civilised countries 
muzzling and quarantine measures should be enforced. 

Inoculation with a vaccine of fixed attenuated virus aims at 
producing immunity during the incubation period and reduc es 
the incidence of the disease in persons bitten by rabid animals 
from 16 to less than 1 per cent. Injections are given daily for 
periods up to twenty -one days according to the method of 
preparation employed. 

Any person bitten by a possibly rabid animal should have 
the bite cauterised with carbolic or nitric actid and conimeru*e 
treatment immediately. The animal should be securely cliained, 
and if it is still alive at the end of ten days the patient has 
nothing to fear and may discontinue injections. If it should 
die or be killed, the brain should be examined for the jmtliog” 
nomonic oxyphilic granules (Negri bodies) which can usually 
be demonstrated in the ganglion colls of the hippocampus. 

F. E. Lipscomb. 



DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN 
PARASITES 


DISEASES DUE TO FLUKES 

T REALA.TODES or flukes, a number of which are parasitic 
in man, have a leaf-shaped unsegmented body equipped 
with suckers. Only one variety is important in the 
production of disease in man, the Bilharzia (Schistosoma),* 
which produces bilharziasis. 

Life History* — There are numerouB varieties of flukes which 
infest man, and the habitat of the adult may be in the intestine, 
the bile ducts, the lung, and the blood vessels. Fertihsed eggs 
are discharged in the faeces, the urine, or the sputum ; these 
eggs develop in water and produce a ciliated embryo or 
miracidium, which jienetrates certain species of snail ; after 
a period of development in the snail the organisms enter the 
water as cercariae, which may be either encysted or free- 
swimming. The cercariae are either swallowed in drinking 
water or may burrow through the unbroken skin, and thus 
the hfo-cycle is completed. 

Bilharziasis (Schistosomiasis). — Two common forms of the 
disease are encountered, one due to the Bilharzia hwrnatolna 
and tlio other to Bilharzia tnansoni. In both, the flukes inhabit 
tlie smaller veins, and produce eggs which are discharged into 
the bladder in the first type and through the wall of the colon 
in the second. The eggs are oval bodies of relatively large 
size (about 150 /x in length) ; in the case of the haematobia 
variety there is a sharp terminal spine, while the mansoni 
variety has a lateral spine. The sj^mptoms in bilharziasis 
are due not to adult flukes in the blood but to local irritation 
in the bladder or rectum from the passage of ova through the 
walls of the viscus. 

Bilharziasis is widely distributed, particularly in Eg^qit 
and South Africa. Infection arises fiom bathing in water 
containing the fioe-swimming cercariae, which penetrate the 
intact skin. In some areas the disease is extremely common. 

211 



212 DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN PARASITES 

A third species, Bilharzia japonica, occurs in the Far East 
and causes an intestinal bilharziasis characterised in its later 
stages by great enlargement of the spleen and liver. 

Symptoms . — In the disease due to Bilharzia hcematobia 
the main symptom is haematuria, due to irritation of the bladder. 
At the end of micturition a few drops of blood are passed and 
niunerous ova are foimd in the urine. Sometimes the chronic 
bladder irritation may lead to abscesses and calculi, but often 
the haematuria persists for years without serious symptoms. 
With the Bilharzia mansoni infections, the lower part of the 
colon and the rectum are mainly aflFected. The mucous mem- 
brane becomes thickened and polypoid, the stools contain blood 
and mucus, and ova are discharged in the faeces. In some 
cases the liver may become cirrhotic and ascites develop. 
Eosinophilia is often present. 

Treatment . — Intravenous injections of tartar emetic are 
most effective. The initial dose for on adult is ^ gr. in 10 c.c. 
of sterile saline, and the injection is repeated on alternate days 
increasing the dose up to a maximxim of 2 gr. A total amount 
of about 25 gr. should be given. Fouadin (Bayer) can be given 
intramuscularly. The initial dose is 1-5 c.c., on the second 
day 3*5 c.c., and subsequently o c.c. on alternate days until 
a total of 40 c.c. has been given. Anthiomaline (May and Baker) 
is also effective. Prophylaxis dej^ends on avoiding bathing in 
infected water and the prevention of evac uation of urine or 
feces near or into water. 


DISEASES DUE T(J TAPE-WORMS 

Cestodes or tape-worms inhabit the upjxjr {>ortion of the 
ahxnentary canal in man and other animals, and discharge 
their ova in the faeces. The ova are ingested by a secondary 
host, and larval forms develop in its muscles and other viscera. 
When the secondary host is eaten by the original host the 
larvae are ingested and develop into mature ta{)e-worms. 

In most cases of tape-worm infection in man, the adult 
worm lives in the intestine, but in one important group, the 
Tcmia echinococcvs, the primary host is the dog, and develop- 
ment of the larvae occurs in the viscera of man and produces 
what is known as hydatid disease. The ta|>e-worms which 
inhabit the human intestine are tho following: (1) Tsenia 
solium, (2) Tsenia saginata, (3) Dibothriocephalus latus. 

There is a great variation in the size and morphology of 
the different forms of tape-worm, but generally s{>eakmg their 



DISEASES DUE TO TAPE-WORMS 


213 


structure is similar, and consists of a head portion or scolex 
and a number of flattened segments which are posterior to 
the scolex. There is no ahmentary canal, and the segments 
derive their nutrition by direct absorption of the intestinal 
contents. Each segment contains differentiated sexual organs, 
and when fully developed contains ripe ova. As the worm 
grows, segments are discharged in the faeces. 

Taenia Solium. — This tape-worm is common in northern 
Europe. Its secondary host is the pig, which becomes infected 
by eating ova discharged in human faeces. In the pig the 
ova develop into small oval vesicles, the Cyaticercus cellidoace, 
which are found in the skeletal muscles and are about 20 mm. 
in length. If those are eaten by man the CyaticerciLs develops 
into an adult Tcmia solium in the intestine. The Cyaticerci are 
destroyed by cooking, and therefore the disease is only prevalent 
in countries where ham is oaten raw or partially cooked. 

Tcenia solium is 6 to 9 ft. in length, with a globular head 
armed with a double circle of booklets and four suckers, by 
means of which it attaches itself to the mucous membrane of 
the intestine. The head is extremely minute as compared with 
the size of the ripe segments and does not exceed 2 to 3 mm. in 
diameter. 

Symptoms , — Often there are no sjanptoms beyond the 
passing of segments of the worm in the faeces. Sometimes there 
is vague abdominal discomfort, with a voracious appetite. 
Usually there is no impairment of the general health, but the 
patient may become very neurotic. An eosinophilia is some- 
times found, though anaemia is unusual. 

TreatmeTU , — The object of treatment in all tj-pes of 
intestinal tape-worm infection is to effect a complete evacuation 
of the worm, including the head portion. If the latter remain, 
it will produce further segments in the course of a few months. 
The drug which has a specific anthelmintic effect on tape- 
worms is male fern. Details of treatment are as follows : — 

The patient is put on a very light diet for two days before the 
male fern is to be administered, and the bowols are kept freely 
open with saline purgatives. Food is withheld entirely after 
midday on the second day of treatment. On the morning of 
the third day two doses of the following mixture are given 
at half an hour’s interval : Ext. filicis liq. 5b SjTup. Zingiber 3i, 
Gum acacia gr. xxx, Aquam ad Ji. 

The male fern is liable to produce nausea, which may to 
some extent be avoided by taking a cup of black coffee between 
the doses. After the last dose of male fem a strong saline purge 
is taken to effect the discharge of the worm. Careful sear^ 



214 DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN PARASITES 

of the faeces should be made for the head of the worm : if this 
remains unpassed, segments may reappear in the stools in three 
months and a further treatment is required. Castor oil must 
be avoided when male fern is employed, as toxic effects may 
occur. 

When treatment by male fern is unsuccessful, the axjtive 
principle of pomegranate seeds, known as pelleterine, may be 
tried. This drug is given on an empty stomach in a capsule 
in doses of ^ to 4 gr., and is followed two hours later by a 
purgative. 

Taenia Saginata. — This worm in the adult form is several 
yards long, and the head is equipped with suckers but no 
booklets. The larval stage occurs in the cow, where it is known 
as the Cysticercua bovis. The cysts are foimd mainly in the 
muscles of mastication. The symptoms and treatment are 
similar to those described above. 

Dibothriocephalus Latus. — ^This worm is very long arul 
has an enormous number of broad segments. It is found 
chiefly around the Baltic, and the larval stage is j>as8ed in 
certain fish, the eating of which, insufficiently cooked, produces 
infection in man. 

Infection with the Dibothriocephalus may produce a severe 
megalocytic anasmia. Possibly this is due to defective absorption 
of haemopoietin {vide p. 352). Male fern is usually an effective 
anthelmintic. 

Somatic Tssuiasis (Cysticercosis). — The cystieercus cellulosae 
stage of Tcenia solium may occur in man. This results from 
ripe segments of the worm reaching the stomach during an 
attack of vomiting, or by accidental swallowing of the ova. 
In such cases the Cysiicerci may develop in the muscles or 
brain, where they may produce epileptic fits. 

Hydatid Disease 

Whereas in the other forms of tajxj-worrn the adult worm 
lives in man, in disease due to ToRnia echmococcus the larval 
stage is passed in man, and the mature wonn inhabits the 
intestines of animals, chiefly the dog. The disease, specially 
common in Australia, also occurs elsewhere. Human infection 
results from close contact with dogs, which discharge ova in 
their feeces. The worm itself is very minute, and does not 
exceed 5 mm. in length ; the head is provided with four suckers 
and a double row of booklets ; there are only three segments, 
the last of which alone produces ova. 

When the ovum is swallowed by man the embryo is liberated. 



HYDATID DISEASE 


216 


and ultimately reaches the blood stream after burrowing 
through the wall of the intestine. It may be carried in the 
blood to the liver, the lungs, the kidneys, or the brain. Having 
eventually come to rest in one or other viscus, most commonly 
the liver, the embryo is converted into a small cyst with two 
definite layers, an external laminated membrane and an internal 
parenchymatous layer, the endocyst. As a result of local tissue 
irritation a fibrous capsule is formed, shutting off the cyst from 
the surrounding tissues. As the cyst increases in size, buds 
develop from the inner parenchymatous la 3 ^r and become 
daughter cysts, which again in turn produce granddaughter 
cysts. In this way the original C 3 r 8 t gradually enlarges, and 
may contain large numbers of smaller cysts. From the inner 
layer of the cysts further buds arise, which develop into brood 
capsules. These buds form scolices, which represent the head 
of the Tcenia echinococcus with its sucking discs and a circle 
of hooklets. The fluid in the cyst is clear and non-albuminous, 
with a spocific gravity of about 1,005, and the characteristic 
hooklets may be found in the fluid. 

The echinococcus cysts may remain aUve for an almost 
indefinite period, but sometimes they die and the cyst becomes 
inspissated, and sometimes partly calcified. In other cases 
rupture takes place as the cyst enlarges, and the daughter 
cysts and scolices are discharged into the lung, peritoneum, 
])ericardium, or to the exterior. Lastly, the cyst may become 
infected and suppurate. 

Approximately 70 per cent, of hydatid cysts occur in the 
liver. The symptoms produced will depend entirely on the 
site of the cyst and on such accidental occurrences as its rupture 
or suppuration. 

Hydatids ol the liver. — The liver may become very much 
enlarged as the result of the presence of hydatids. The physical 
signs will vary with the part of the organ which is involved. 
If the cyst is in the right lobe near the posterior surface, the 
liver is enlarged upwards towards the pleural cavity, and 
there is dullness on percussion over the right base and in the 
posterior axillary line. With great enlargement there is 
bulging of the right side of the thorax, especially in the lower 
portion. When the cyst occupies a position in the anterior 
part of the liver a swelling may be felt in the epigastric region, 
which has a tense, firm feeling and a smooth surface. 
When the cyst is superficial, a hydatid tkriU may occasion- 
ally l>e elicited if the tumour is palpated with one hand 
and tapped gently with the fingers of the other hand. 
With cysts in the left lobe of the liver the heart is displaced 



216 DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN PARASITES 

upwards, and there is an increased area of dullness in the left 
hypochondrium. ' 

Symptoms may be completely lacking, and there is seldom 
any general disturbance of health. With large tumours there 
may be sensations of dragging or pressure in the region of 
the liver. 

With suppuration serious symptoms develop and the case 
resembles one of hepatic abscess, with rigors, pyrexia, sweating, 
and sometimes jaimdice. If the cyst perforates into an adjacent 
viscus, its contents may be coughed up should the perforation 
be into the lung ; or in the cases of perforation into the ali- 
mentary tract, portions of the cyst may be vomited or passed 
in the faeces. 

The diagnosis of hydatid cyst may be suspected when 
there is marked hepatic enlargement which has b^n observed 
to be present over a long period without impairment of health. 
The condition has to be differentiated from growths of the 
liver, syphilitic cirrhosis, tropical or other abscesses, and right- 
sided pleural effusions. Points in favour of hydatid are 
bulging of the chest wall, a smooth surface to the tumour, 
and the presence of the hydatid thrill. Eosinophilia is common 
in patients \^dth hydatid disease, and a blood count is always 
advisable with obscure hepatic enlargements. As a further 
aid to diagnosis a complement fixation test may l>e i^rformed, 
but the results of the test caimot l)e regarded as conclusive. 
This is also true of the skin reaction test of Casoni, in which 
a few drops of hydatid fiuid are mje(’ted intradermally. 
The immediate appearance of an urticarial wheal at the 
site of injection usually indicates that the patient harbours 
hydatids. 

Hydatids of the Lung and Pleura. — The cysts compress the 
lung, and ultimately lead to haemoptysis, inflammation, and 
gangrene. 

Hydatids of the Kidneys. — ^This condition is rare. The 
kidney may be converted into an enormous cyst resembling a 
hydroneph^is. Small cysts and booklets may Ije passed in 
the urine, with accompanying attacks of renal colic. 

Hydatids of the Nervous System. — Symptoms of cerebral 
tumour are produced with headaches, convulsions, and 
sometimes insanity. 

Treatment of Hydatids. — Unfortunately, no drug has any 
effect upon hydatids. Treatment is entirely surgical, and in 
the case of hydatids of the liver involves either complete 
removal or drainage of the cyst. Care must bo taken to avoid 
dissemination of the cysts in the oourse of operation. 



DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN PARASITES 217 


DISEASES DUE TO ROUND WORMS 

There are a number of Nematodes or round worms which 
infect the human intestine. The most important of these 
are Ascaris lumbricoideSy Enterobius vermicvlaris, Trichuris 
trichiuray Ankylostoma and Trichinella spiralis. In addition to 
the intestinal nematodes, the Filarioidea inhabit the lymphatic 
vessels, and the guinea-worm the tissues of the foot. Unlike 
the tape-worms, round worms have an alimentary canal and 
are not composed of separate segments. 

Ascaris Lumbricoides. — ^This worm is 6 to 10 in. in length 
and reddish-brown in colour. Ova are passed in the faeces. 
These are brown oval bodies about 70 p in length and 60 ^ in 
width. Autoinfection can take plaoe by their transfer from the 
anus to the mouth. 

Usually Ascaris is found in the small intestine, but some- 
times the worms may enter the stomach and be vomited. More 
rarely they have been found blocking the common bile-duct or 
in the ap|)endix. Often no symptoms are produced. Some- 
times, however, the presence of round worms may lead to the 
passage of blood and mucus in the stools, whdch may be 
mistaken for dysentery ; more often flatus and distension are 
troublesome symptoms. Should a worm die and remain in 
the upper intestine, toxic absorption occurs, with pyrexia and 
vomiting. The worms are often passed in the stools, and a 
y)atient who knows himself to be infected is liable to develop 
various neuroses. 

Treatment . — Santonin (2 to 5 gr.) is given on three successive 
nights followed by castor oil in the morning. Occasionally 
it products vertigo and yellow vision. 

Oxsruriasis. — Tlie Enterobius vermicularis. often known as 
the Orynris vermicularis, is the thread-worm, which inhabits 
the colon and particularly the rectum. It is only about i in. 
long. Ova and worms are found in the fseces, and the main 
symptom produced is itching an>iind the anus, particularly 
at night. 'Hic patient is usually a child, and the most 
satisfactory treatment is to wash out the rectum and lower 
bowel with an infusion of quassia (1 in 40): this proc^edure 
should l)e rej)eated every other day for a fortnight. Saline 
purgatives will help to dislodge the wonns, and the itching is 
treated by application of ung. hydrarg. nit. dil. It is im- 
portant to avoid autoinfection by waging the hands and 
porineum thoroughly after defrecation. 



218 DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN PARASITES 

Triohuris Trichiora (Trichocephalus dispar ), — This worm 
is commonly known as the whip-worm, and is about 1| in. in 
length. The hinder portion of the worm is very thick and the 
anterior thin and hair-like, a peculiarity which gives rise to its 
popular name. No symptoms are usually produced. All forms 
of treatment are ineffective. 

Ankylostoma Duodenale. — Whereas all the rotmd worms 
described above produce but few, if any, symptoms, the 
ankylostoma or hook-worm is a serious menace if not to life 
at any rate to health, and produces the disease known as 
ankylostomiasis. The parasite exists in almost all parts of the 
world, but particularly in the tropics. Epidemics have occurred 
among miners in Cornwall, Germany, and Switzerland. 

Life History , — The adult worm is about 10 to 15 mm. in 
length, and the mouth is provided with two pairs of sharp hook- 
shaped teeth with which it pierces the mucous membrane of the 
intestine. The ova are passed in the faeces, and if they faU 
upon warm soil they develop into larvae, which are able to 
penetrate the intact skin. After entering the veins they pass 
upwards through the heart into the pulmonary circulation, 
from which they burrow into the bronchi. They then ascend 
through the trachea, and after passing the larynx go down the 
oesophagus to develop into adult worms in the up{)er part of 
the small intestine. 

Infection occurs in man if the feet are exix)8ed to mud or 
water in which the embryo worms are }>re8ent : this explains 
epidemics among workers in mines and tunnels. The disease 
can only occur where proper sanitation is lacking. 

Ankylostomiasis. — The parasites produce a local lesion 
at their site of entry, which is most commonly on the feet 
or hands. Small vesicles and pustules are formed, with some 
local inflammation which subsides in the course of a few days. 
The local lesions are described as “ ground-itch.” 

The general symptoms depend partly on the number of 
worms which infect the intestine, and })artly on the reaction of 
the individual patient. In many regions as many as 90 per 
cent, of the population are infected, as judged by the finding 
of ova in the faeces, but only a projKution show symptoms. 

The main clinical features are hypochromic anaemia, 
abdominal discomfort, failure of nutrition, and lassitude. 
In children growth is markedly stunted. The haemoglobin 
may fall 30 per cent, with marked oedema, and death may 
occur from exhaustion and intercuirent infections. Eosino- 
philia ranges from 10 to 30 per cent. Gastro-intestinal symptoms 
are sometimes present and perversions of appetite occur, as 



ANKYLOSTOMIASIS 219 

the result of which patients may eat earth, clay, hair, or paper. 
Severe anaemia causes dyspnoea and cardiac dilatation. 

Diagnosis , — This can be made definitely by the discovery 
of ova in the faeces ; these are oval bodies about 60 /a in length 
and 40 /i in breadth. The ova have thin transparent cax)sules 
enclosing a number of cells. Eosinophilia with anaemia is highly 
suggestive of ankylostomiasis. 

Prophylaxis and Treaimmi . — ^The Rockefeller Foundation 
has inaugurated a world-wide campaign against ankylostomiasis, 
which is already producing satisfactory results. In the prophy- 
laxis of the disease sanitation is of the greatest importance, 
and with properly constructed latrines the incidence of the 
disease is greatly decreased. , When the disease is prevalent 
the population must be educated to imderstand the dangers of 
indiscriminate defsecation, and also the necessity for treatment 
of infected individuals. 

As an anthelmintic tetrachlorethylene is safe and effective. 
Four cubic centimetres are given in a single dose shaken up in 
8 drachms of Epsom salts. This is taken in the early morning, 
and the salts are repeated in three hours if the bowels are not 
o{)ened. Thymol is also employed. In adults three cachets 
of 30 gr. each are given at two-hourly intervals followed by 
a saline purge. Thymol is soluble in fats and alcohol, which 
must therefore be avoided during treatment. Two further 
treatments should be given at weekly intervals. 

Trichinella Spiralis.- This is an extremely small worm 
which inhabits the small intestine. The disease known as 
trichiniasis is produced, not by the presence of adult worms 
in the intestine, but by the migration of their embryos into 
the muscles. 

IJJe History . — The adult worm inliabits the intestine of the 
pig, and produces large numbers of embryos which j)enetrate 
the wall of the gut and enter the blood stream, by wliich route 
they ultimately reach the skeletal muscles. Lodged in these 
they develop into small cysts about 1 mm. in len^h. Within 
the cyst lies the embryo worm in a spiral coil. No further 
development takes place unless the flesh of the infectetl animal 
is eaten by man or other animal. If this occurs the cyst wall 
is digested and the trichinella embryo mpidly grows into an 
adult wonn in the intestine. The worm produces large numbers 
of larvae, which migrate to the striated muscles, where cysts are 
formed. The encysted trichina may remain alive for many 
years, but in course of time the cysts may calcify, and are 
also readily destroyed by heat. 

Trichiniaiis. — Iliis results from eating infected pork which 



220 DISEASES DUE TO METAZOAN PARASITES 

has been insufficiently cooked, and is .relatively common in 
Grermany. Careful inspection of meat before distribution and 
the avoidance of raw or partially cooked ham prevent the 
dissemination of the disease. 

Symptoms , — Soon after eating infected meat there may be 
abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea, but very often these 
symptoms are slight. The more serious symptoms arise 
between the seventh and the tenth da^ys after infection, when the 
embryos are passing from the intestine to the muscles. At 
this stage there is usually considerable fever, and the migration 
of the parasites into the muscles causes an acute myositis, with 
much tenderness and pain. The temperature may simulate 
that of typhoid fever. A secondary anaemia develops, and the 
leucocyte count is high with a great increase in the eosinophils. 
(Edema of the eyes is often a striking chnical feature. In 
protracted cases there is much emaciation. 

Diagnosis . — This may be made definitely by the removal of 
a small portion of muscle, in which the trichina cysts can be 
seen, or by finding the larvae in samples of the pork which the 
patient has eaten. Eosinophilia occurring in a case of continued 
fever should also rouse suspicion. The disease has to be 
differentiated from typhoid fever and acute rheumatism. In 
the latter disease the pain is in the joints and not in the muscles, 
while in typhoid, leucopenia and the absence of muscular pain 
and tenderness will assist in the diagnosis. 

Treatment . — No satisfactory treatment is available which 
will affect the encysted embryos, but the alimentarj' canal 
should ]ye cleared of the adult worms by calomel, castor oil, 
and salines. When the muscular pain is severe it must be 
reheved by sedatives. 

Filariasis. — Several different genera of the order of filarioidea 
have been described, and are widely distributed in the tropics. 
The adult worms are thread-hke organisms approximately 2 in. 
long, which inhabit the lymphatic system. They produce 
embryo worms which arc less than i mm. in length and of the 
diameter of a blood corpuscle. In the case of Wuchereria 
bancrofti the embryos appear in the peripheral blood during 
the night or while the patient is sleeping. For the full cycle 
of development to occur an insect (e.g., mosquito in the case of 
W. bancrofti) is necessary as a secondary host. The latter, 
on sucking blood from an infected person, withdraws with the 
blood a number of filaria embryos, which undergo stages of 
development in the body of tlie insect. Intimately the larvae 
reach the proboscis and thus infect human beings. 

Infection with filaria produces various symptoms dependent 



FILARIASIS 


221 


on obstruction of the lymphatics by the adult vorms. The 
parts of the body most commonly affected are the legs and the 
scrotum, where the blockage of the lymphatics pr^uces the 
condition known as depharUiasia, in which there is marked 
thickening and brawny oedema of the parts involved. A 
remarkable symptom which sometimes occurs in filarial 
infections is chyliuia ; from time to time the patient passes 
white opaque urine which resembles milk. This pheno- 
menon is due to a rupture of lymphatic vessels into the 
urinary tract. 

There is no effective treatment for filarial infection, but 
chyluria may be diminished by restricting the amount of fat in 
the diet. Where the elephantiasis is localised, as in the scrotum, 
surgical removal is indicated. 

Quinea-worm. — This worm occurs in parts of Africa and 
in the East Indies. It is found subcutaneously in the neigh- 
bourhood of the feet, where it forms a palpable coiled mass 
under the skin. Eventually the head of the worm ulcerates 
through the skin, and living embryos are discharged to the 
exterior. These develop in water and are ingested by a small 
crustacean, the cyclops, in which they develop. If the cyclops 
l)e swallowed in drinking w’atcr the larva* grow into a mature 
worm, which later buirows from the intestine into the leg. 

The head of the worm may l)e seen in the base of the ulcer. 
After discharging its cmbr\o8 it often leaves the body sjion- 
taneously. Natives who are affected with guinea-worm roll it 
around a small stick, and each day wind a little more out until 
the entire worm is withdrawn. Care must be taken not to 
rupture the wonn, which is about 18 in. in length. 

J. J. CONYBEARE. 



DISEASES OF INFANTS 


DISEASES OF THE NEWLY-BORN 

A t birth, and in the period immediately subsequent to birth, 
the infant is exposed to many hazards. Shoidd he survive 
the perils of the progress through the maternal passages, 
he is then extruded into an environment vastly different from 
the one in which he has hitherto developed. Many functions 
previously carried out by the mother have now to be performed 
by the infant, and during this period of adaptation and adjust- 
ment many diseases may develop ; with the more common of 
these this section is concerned. 

1. Inanition Fever. — Slight variations of temperature are 
seen in many newly-bom infants, for the heat-regulating centre 
is immature, and therefore does not function efficiently. In 
some infants a considerable degree of fever develops between 
two and four days after birth. The temperature may rise to 
104® or 105® F. There is restlessness, irritability, rapid and 
extensive loss of weight, and a tendency to suck eagerly at any 
object within reach. Within a few hours signs of collapse 
appear, the cry becomes weak, the puke feeble, and the 
fontanelle sunken. This is known as inanition fever. 

Infants with this condition are either being nursed on 
dr}' breasts, or, if artificially fed, are receiving an insufficient 
supply of fluid. When water is freely given the tem[)erature 
rapidly falls, and in a few hours recovery is complete. There- 
fore the best method both of preventing and treating inanition 
fever is to ensure an adequate supply of fluid to the newly- 
bom. 

2. Cyanosi.s in the XEwr.Y-Bonx.- f Cyanosis, cither <x)n- 
stant or intermittent, may be sixm in the nwnatal i)eriod ; 
this may l>e caused by damage to the (x-ntral neiT'ous system 
at birth, by congenital malformation of the heart, or by in- 
complete expansion of the lungs, the last l>eing often associated 
with intracranial lesions. If the cyanosis is due to congenital 
morbus cordis, cardiac murmurs are usually to he heard ; if 
it is due to a lesion of the brain, other signs, such as fits, bulging 

222 



DISEASES OF THE NEWLY-BORN 


223 


fontanelle, weak cry, and inability to suck are usually present. 
When the cyanosis is caused by incomplete pulmonary expan- 
sion, to which the term atelectasis neonatorum is applied, 
there may be found some slight dullness and fine crepitations 
over the posterior aspect of the lower lobes of the lungs associ- 
ated with a weak cry and a general lack of vitality. The clinical 
picture of atelectasis is often none too clear and it may not be 
easy to identify the cause of cyanosis in many cases. The 
treatment of cyanosis will depend on the cause. Nothing of 
moment can be done for the infant with congenital heart 
disease ; if the cyanosis is due to intra-cranial lesions the 
infant must be treated w ith the greatest gentleness, kept warm, 
and given oxygen to which 5 per cent, carbon dioxide has been 
added. Infants with atelectasis should also be treated in this 
way. It is also iraj>ortant to see that these infants receive 
adequate food. 

3. Icterus Neonatorum. — Icterus neonatorum is noticed 
in more than half of all newly -bom infants. It appears from 
the second to the fifth day ^ter birth, increases in intensity 
for three or four days, and then gradually fades. It is usually 
not noticeable after the end of the second week. Apart from 
the discoloration, these jaundiced infants appear to be healthy ; 
they nurse well, are contented, neither the spleen nor the 
liver is enlarged, and both the stools and urine are normal. 
Icterus neonatorum is the result of an increase of bilirubin 
in the blood of the n^vly-bom ; the increase is produced by 
haemolysis of red blood cells which takes place in the first 
few days after birth. Tliis haemolysis occurs in all infants and 
it is the means by which the erythraemia of foetal life is 
corrected. It is presumed that in some newly-bom infants 
the immature liver is unable to deal with this excess of 
bilirubin and in such infants icterus neonatorum occurs. 
Jaimdice in premature infants is apt to be constant and 
severe ; this is explained by the 8up{x>8ition that the liver 
of the premature performs its function in relation to the 
bilirubin even less completely than the liver of the full-time 
child. 

Icterus neonatorum is not the only variety of jaundice 
found in the newly-bom. Congenital occlusion of the bile 
ducts, syi^hilitic hepatitis, sepsis, and haemoljdic aniemia of 
the newly-born, may all produce jaundice which may be 
confused with icterus neonatorum. In congenital occlusion 
of the bile duets the infant is jaundiced from birth, the stools 
are pale, the discoloration gradually increases in intensity, 
and death takes place in several months from mahiutrition. 



224 DISEASES OF INFANTS 

In syphilitic hepatitis other signs of syphilis are usually present. 
In jaundice caused by septic infections the general bad condition 
of the child will point to the diagnosis. The jaundice seen in 
haemolytic anaemia of the newly-bom is mentioned in the 
paragraph dealing with the anaemias of infancy (vide p. 255). 

Icterus neonatorum require no treatment. 

4. HiEMORRHAGIO DISEASE OF THE NeWLY-BORN. — The 
newly-bom infant may bleed into the skin and viscera, or from 
the mucous membranes ; in either case the cause may be 
injur^^ during birth or a general septic infection. Quite apart 
from these conditions some infants bleed (without any apparent 
cause) during the first ten days of life ; this condition is known 
as haemorrhagic disease of the newly-bom. 

The bleeding in tliis disease takes place from the mucous 
membranes, usually from the intestine, and the blood is passed 
per anum ; occasionally blood is vomited, and at times oozing 
takes place from the stump of the umbilical cord or from the 
mouth. The period of time during which this bleeding is most 
likely to occur is from the second to the fifth day of life ; it 
docs not occur after the tenth day. 

It has Ixxm suggested that the cause of this disorder is 
a lack of prothrombin in the blood ; lK>th the blmiing and 
clotting times are increased. l>iagnosi8 is usually easy, as 
the luemorrhage in mo.st easels is exUTnal ; some confusion, 
however, may ari.se wluui infants vomit blood derived from 
le.sions either of their own mouth or of the maternal breast. 
Treatment is usually satisfactory. In mild cases vitamin K 
in 3 to 5 rngm. doses daily should be given. In severe cases 
a transfusion of r><J to 100 c.c. of blood may be re<iuir(Ml in addi- 
tion to vitamin K. These transfusions may Ihj rejx^ated if 
nec(*s8ary. 

5. Sepsis in the Newly-born. — 'J'he aseptic management 
of birth has verj" greatly diminished the incidence of sepsis 
in the newdy-born. Infection may take place either tlirough 
the tliin skin or the open wound of the umbiliiral stump. The 

-resulting infection may \je either local or general, but in many 
cases local infection may subsequently larconu^ generalised. 
In both cases .synii)tom8 are evident l>efore tlu^ twelfth day. 
Ix)cal infection manifests itaelf in several w avs : in inflammation 
of the umbilicus, so-called omjihalitis ; in eryBi})elas around 
the umbilicus ; in the fonnation of bulhe on ^le skin, known 
as pemplugus neonatorum. General infections j>n>duee wasting, 
fever, haimorrhages, jaundice, and areas of suppuration situat^ 
anywhere in the body. The diagnosis of these conditions does 
not usually present difficulty. Pemphigus neonatorum is to be 



ANiEMIA IN INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD 225 

distinguished from syphilitic pemphigus. In the latter the 
buUse are found on the palms and soles, and other evidence of 
syphilis is present. The treatment is symptomatic. Collections 
of pus need to be dealt with on the usual surgical lines. 


ANEMIA IN INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD 

Aiuemia in infancy and childhood may be either haemolytic 
or anhsematopoietic. The haemolytic anaemias are the more 
uncommon, but they are of considerable clinical interest, more 
particularly the acute haemolytic anaemia of the newly -bom. 
This disorder may present itself in three forms ; firstly, as a 
generalised oedema with anaemia, the so-called hydrops foetalis ; 
secondly, as jaundice with anaemia, this is icterus gravis 
neonatorum ; thirdly, as a simple hauuolytic anaemia. In all 
three forms the spleen is palpable, the red cells much reduced, 
the colour index high, and many immature red cells can be 
seen in the film. As a result of this blood picture this disorder 
is sometimes termed “ erythroblastosis fcetalis/’ 

In most cases this anaemia is caused by a haemolytic 
agglutinin derived from the mother and passed into the infant’s 
circulation through the placenta. This agglutinin is produced 
when a male who has the Rhesus (Rh.) agglutinogen begets a 
child by a woman who lacks this agglutinogen, the resulting 
foetus usually c^ontains the Rh. agglutinogen and in response 
to this the haunolytic agglutinin is formed by the mother. 

The treatment of this disorder is by immediate and repeated 
l>lood transfusions, tlie blood being obtained from a donor 
lacking the Rh. agglutinogen. 

A chronic haunolj'tic aiuemia of unknown origin with 
splenomegaly and a marked leucocytosis of myelocjies of 
all kinds is occasionally seen in the second year ; this is Von 
Jaksch’s syndrome. In this disorder recovery usually takes 
place. 

The anhtematojK)ietic unaunias showing a deficient formation 
of red cells or of haunoglobin or of lK)th are usually the result 
of some dietetic deficiency. The most important of these is 
the anaemia due to lack of iron, the nutritional anaemia of 
infants.’* It may bo said that most infants whose milk diet 
after the age of six months is not supplemented by iron- 
containing foods wll develop this disoi^er. The treatment 
consists in the aulministration of iron salts. 

At all ages of infancy and childhood, infections both acute 
and chronic can produce an amemia which often appears to be 



226 DISEASES OP INFANTS 

both hsemolytic and anhsematopoietic in character. The 
exact mechanism of production of this anaemia is not known. 


THE GASTRO INTESTINAL DISORDERS 
OF INFANTS 

The gastro-intestinal disturbanoes of infants are of great 
importance. They are very common, and are a frequent cause 
of death ; many of them can be prevented, and most are 
amenable to treatment. These disorders consist of symptoms 
or combinations of symptoms derived from the gastro- 
intestinal tract and produced by widely different causes. 
When prolonged they lead to profound alteration in the 
nutritional state. The disturbances to be considered are colic, 
constipation, vomiting, diarrhoea, and wasting or atrophy. 

etiology. — The causes of these disturbances are to a great 
extent covered by a consideration of the four factors — food, 
infection, environment, and constitution. 

1. Food . — This is an important element in the cause of 
these conditions. The food as a whole may be unsuitable : 
it may be excessive in amount, resulting in colic, vomiting, and 
diarrhoea ; it may be insufficient, with the production of 
constipation and wasting. Apart from the food as a whole, 
the individual constituents may be at fault : the protein may 
be excessive, giving colic and constipation ; the carbohydrates 
and fats in too large quantities may cause diarrhcjea and 
vomiting ; lastly, in certain instances the water content of the 
diet may be too low, with resulting fever and collapse. 

2. Infection . — As a cause of gastro intestinal disturbanoes, 
infection may act in two ways. Firstly, there may be a direct 
infection of the gastro-intestinal tract by various micro- 
organisms, producing fever, vomiting, and diarrhoea. These 
infections usuallj^ take place through the medium of the food, 
and are known as enteral infections. Secondly, an infant may 
have an infection not involving the gastro-intestinal tract, 
such as otitis media, pyelitis, or bronchitis, and yet may show 
severe gastro-intestinal symptoms, vomiting, diarrhoea, and 
wasting. When infections of this nature occur, they are known 
as parenteral infections. These conditions are common and 
toe of veiy great importance. 

3. EnvironmerU. — The influence of the environment in the 
production of gastro-intestinal disorders is important. Heat 
plays a great part in the incidence of diarrhceal conditions by 
depressing the vitahly of the child, by lowering the toleranoe 



GASTRO INTESTINAL DISORDERS OF INFANTS 227 

for food, and by facilitating the growth in food of harmful 
micro-organisms. Exposure to cold is a potent factor in the 
production of colic. General bad hygienic conditions are 
obviously of importance in allowing food infection to take 
place. 

4. ConsiittUion . — Certain constitutional defects, for example 
congenital morbus cordis, hydrocephalus, and birth palsies, 
produce gastro-intestinal symptoms such as wasting and 
constipation. A neurotic constitution is often alleged to be a 
cause of vomiting. The fat and flabby infant with the so-called 
exudative diathesis is prone to diarrhoea. 

This outline of the factors concerned in these disorders must 
be completed by pointing out that gastro-intestinal symptoms 
may and do occur in various diseases associated with organic 
changes in the gastro-intestinal tract or elsewhere in the body. 
For example, vomiting accompanies increased intracranial 
pressure ; both vomiting and constipation occur in obstruction 
of the intestinal tract. In such conditions, however, the 
gastro-intestinal symptoms are but incidents in the course of 
the disease and are usually overshadowed by the other signs 
and symptoms present. 

With this general consideration of the causes of these 
disturbances in mind, a brief outline of the clinical features 
and treatment of these conditions may be drawn. 

Colic. — This disorder is most often seen in the first three 
months of life. The symptoms are somewhat characteristic, 
and usually point plainly to the diagnosis. Screaming attacks 
of short duration and drawing up of the legs, with immediate 
rehef on the passage of flatus, are observed. Colic is often 
associated with constipation, and at times with diarrhoea. 
The cause is usually to be foimd in some fault in the diet, 
though chilling of the body surface often plays an important 
part. Air swallowed with the food is at times responsible. 
Treatment should be directed to the cause. Any fault in the 
composition or in the quantity of the food must be corrected. 
During the actual attack, warmth applied to the abdomen and 
a small enema of warm water give relief. Small doses of 
carminatives are of value while the cause is being detected 
and remedied. 

Conitipation is a common symptom in gastro-intestinal 
^turbances. There are two important causes : insufficiency 
in the amount of food, which is a frequent cause in the breast- 
fed infant ; too little carbohydrate in the food, which is seen 
in the artificially fed. Quite apart from these, constipatioxi 
occurs as a symptom in organic disease, such as intestinal 



228 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


obstruction, Hirschsprung’s disease, and painful lesions of the 
anus. These must all be excluded by careful examination. In 
the constipation caused by insufficient food, loss of weight is 
an important additional sign. The treatment must be directed 
to the cause, and the necessary alterations must be made to 
the diet. Drugs should play a small part in the treatment. If 
any are required, liquid paraffin, either alone or in associa- 
tion with small doses of milk of magnesia, will be found of 
value. 

Vomiting. — Vomiting, as a symptom of gastro-intestinal 
disturbance, is very common in infancy. The causes are 
various and have already been dealt with to some extent. 

Vomiting may be divided into two categories : vomiting 
alone, and vomiting in association with diarrhoea, llie latter 
will be considered in the section devoted to diarrhoeal disturb* 
ances ; the former only is considered here. The causes of 
vomiting without diarrhoea may be classified in two grouj>8. 
In the first group the causes are mainly mechanical : air 
swallowed during feeding, tight binders around the abdomen, 
excessive handling after feeding, and gastric distension produced 
by overfeeding. In the second group vomiting occurs without 
any apparent cause in a lively, apprehensive infant who is 
cared for by an anxious, somewhat excitable mother ; in these 
infants the diagnosis of ‘‘ nervous vomiting is made. 

The symptom these two groups exhibit is vomiting, usually 
soon after food, accompanied by a progressive loss of weight. 

The diagnosis is often somewhat confusing and the cause 
sometimes difficult to determine. Care must be exercised to 
distinguish those infants in whom the vomiting depends on an 
organic lesion, such as congenital stenosis of the pylorus, 
increased intracranial pressure, or intestinal ol)struction. The 
treatment is to correct the cause wherever jmsible, to decrease 
the amount of the fc^ds, and lengthen the intervals l)etween 
the feeds. Success is sometimes obUiined by making the 
feeds of a semi-solid consistency and feeding with a spoon. 
Atropine is sometimes of value, teginning with 1 minim of a 
1 in 1,000 solution of atro])ine suljihate by mouth. The dose 
should be increased by 1 minim at alternate feeds until 
physiological effects are produced. In “ nervous vomiting ” 
the replacement of the anxious mother by a quiet, efficient 
nurse is of value. Often 1 to 2 gr. chloral hydrate, about a 
quarter of an hour before feeding, will be of vaJue. 

Diarrhma. — The highest death-rate is found in those 
nutritional disturbances of which the main symptom is diarrhoea. 
Vomiting is usually associated with the diarrheea, but as a rule 



GASTRO-INTESTINAL DISORDERS OF INFANTS 229 

it is neither as prominent nor as persistent a symptom. The 
causes of these disturbances have already been outlined above, 
but owing to their importance the brief account there given 
must be a little amplified. Improper food is perhaps the 
most frequent cause. The usual fault found is an excess of 
sugar combined with a high percentage of fat. As a general 
rule it may be stated that it is unsafe to give a percentage of 
total sugar higher than 10, and the fat x>ercentage should not 
exceed 3*5. The disturbance produced by a high fat and sugar 
content in the diet is known as ‘‘ fermentative dyspepsia.” 
The symptoms are due to the fermentation of the excess of 
sugar with the production of acid bodies which irritate the 
gastric and intestinal mucosa. Apart from the composition of 
the food, an excess of food of proper ex^mposition may give rise 
to fermentative dyspepsia. Environmental conditions, such as 
heat and poor hygiene, are potent factors in the production of 
diarrhoea, and their influence is more than ever apparent when 
the food given is faulty. Heat lowers the normal tolerance 
for food and, by increasing the need for water, produces thirst. 
The infant then cries, and this is interpreted as l>eing due to 
hunger ; more food is then given, so that lie is overfed at a 
time when the food should be reduced, and thus fermentative 
dyspepsia is set up. 

Infection, Ixith enteral and parenteral, has l)een mentioned 
as causing diarrluea and vomiting. Parenteral infections are 
of particular imjxirtance ; on only too many occasions has a 
correct diet, even breast milk, been lilarned for producing 
diarrhoea and vomiting, when the disturbance has been due 
to an overlooked parenteral infection. 

The symptoms are of all grades of severity. In mild cases 
increased bowel movements are all that is oliserved. In more 
severe cases, vomiting is usually added to the diarrhcea, and 
there may be considerable excoriation of the buttocks by tlie 
acid irritating stcnds. The general symptoms may be slight, 
but in the sovei'e examples the infant passes into a state id 
so-called “ intoxication.” In this condition the child lies 
stuporous with sunken, half-closed eyes, the* arms are flexed and 
crossed on the chest in the so-called “ lK>xer position.” the 
fontanelle is sunken, the skin inelastic, and there is a greatly 
diminished excretion of urine. Sometimes symptoms indicating 
a diminution of the alkali reserve of the lK)dy l>ecome apparent, 
the infant becomes comatose, the breathing deep and plainly 
audible, the lips cherry-red in colour. 

In some cases the whole disturbance is extremely acute, 
and death may ensue within twelve hours. 



230 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


The stools arc variable ; in the milder cases they are liquid 
and often green in colour. In severe cases they may be like 
rice water. When blood is present, an enteral infection by 
a dysenteric organism may be suspected. The diagnosis is 
usually made without difficulty, but if older infants have 
blood in the stools the possibihty of intussusception must be 
considered. 

Treatment is of great importance. Search is to be made 
for any parenteral infection, which must be treated if found. 
Starvation should be instituted as soon as the diagnosis is 
established. The length of time for which this should be 
continued depends on the state of nutrition of the infant. As a 
general rule it may be stated that food should not be withheld 
for more than twenty -four hours ; in infants of poor nutrition 
only six hours of starvation are necessary. From the beginning 
of treatment fluids should be administered, at least 3 oz. for 
each pound of body- weight, or as much more as the child will 
take, in the twenty-four hours ; half -strength normal saline 
may be used. If marked dehydration is present a continuous 
intravenous drip is indicated. The fluid usixi should be Hart- 
mann’s solution (Lactate-Ringer solution) diluted to half 
strength, and glucose up to 5 ikt cent, should be added to this. 
Approximately 3 oz. for each }X)und of !)ody-weight should 
be given in the twenty-four hours, and when feeding is com- 
menced the amount of fluid given by the drip should be reduced 
by the amount tak(Mi by mouth. If vomiting is a feature, 
a stomach wash is of value and may be repeated when necessary. 
As soon as tlie period of starvation has ended, feeding is to 
commence. Skimmed dried milk in a 1 in 10 dilution, with 
water and added carlx)hydrate in the form of “ dextri-maltose,” 
should be given. The strength of the addcnl carbohydrate is 
1*5 per cent, for the first two days, 3 ix?r cent, for the next 
two days, and then the amount may be raised to 6 per cent. 
The amount of this mixture to be admini.stered should be 
about i oz. at two-hourly intervals, with ten feeds in the 
twenty-four hours. 

The feeds themselves should l>e increased by 2 drachms per 
feed every twenty-four hours for three dajs ; after that time 
amounts of ^ to 1 oz. may l>e added according to the patient s 
condition. After three days the intervals tetw'cen the feeds 
may l>e increased so that the child receives seven feeds in 
twenty-four hours. As a general rule it may be stated that 
milk containing a higher fat content than skimmed milk (0*08 
jicr cent, fat) should not l>e given before the tenth day. As 
regards drugs, if the patient is seen at the outset of the iUness 



GASTRO INTESTINAL DISORDERS OP INFANTS 231 

a dose of J to 1 drachm of castor oil may be given ; apart from 
this, drugs play no part in the treatment. It is as well to 
treat infants with diarrhoea as one would a typhoid patient 
as to disposal of napkins and excreta. In patients with 
symptoms of acidosis, glucose in a 5 to 10 per cent, solution 
may be given by mouth. Sodium bicarbonate is of secondary 
importance, but 16 to 30 gr. may be given four-hourly 
until the urine becomes alkaline. Medication should then 
cease. 

Wasting or Atrophy. — This symptom may be primary, but 
it often results from prolonged gastro-intestinal disorders, such 
as vomiting and diarrhoea. The essential cause of wasting 
is an inability to obtain or absorb enough food. There is 
underfeeding, either because the child actually receives 
insufficient food,'^or the diet, though suitable, is vomited ; 
or, again, because intestinal conditions do not allow ingested 
food to be absorbed. In each case wasting results. 

It cannot be over-emphasised that the most common cause 
of wasting is underfeeding. Particularly is this the case when 
constipation is also present. In all cases of infants with wasting, 
the amount of food not necessarily oflFered but actually being 
taken is to Ikj investigated and its composition reviewed. 

Other causes of wasting are numerous, but not of such 
great importance. It is seen in children with ‘‘ constitutional 
defects ” such as congenital morbus cordis and cerebral palsy ; 
it is associated with infections such as congenital syphilis, 
sepsis, tuberculosis, and empyemata. Infants with wasting are 
sometimes divided into tw^o categories : firstly, those with 
so-caUed “ simple wasting ” or “ atrophy ” ; secondly, those 
with “ atrophy with dyspepsia,” sometimes termed marasmus. 
The first condition is due to a simple lack of food, and when 
a proper diet is given immediate improvement is seen. 
Atrophy with dyspepsia is seen in infants with a long history 
of gastro-intestinal disturbances, by wiiich the tolerance of 
the intestinal tract for food has b^n lowered. When these 
infants are given a suitable diet, there is an immediate 
recrudescence of symptoms and further loss of weight. This 
so-caUed paradoxical reaction to food ” distinguishes atrophy 
with dyspepsia from simple atrophy. The treatment of wasting 
is first of all the treatment for the cause of the symptom, 
whenever this is possible. Any infection present must be 
dealt with, and the diet, both as regards its quantity and its 
quaUty, must be investigated. Most important of all is to 
remember that a wasted infant requires an amount of food 
proportionate not to what he actually weighs, but to what he 



232 DISEASES OF INFANTS 

should weigh if he were normal. This feeding for expected 
weight is the most valuable therapeutic measure that can be 
adopted, and by it brilliant results are achieved. 

The treatment of atrophy with dyspepsia is to be conducted 
on the lines laid down for the treatment of diarrhoea ; but in 
this condition no preliminary period of starvation is necessary, 
and the food may be increased somewhat more quickly to the 
amount required for the expected weight of the infant. Infants 
with dyspeptic atrophy do well on human milk if it can be 
obtained ; but in many cases, as may be realised from the 
definition of the condition, treatment is of little avail. 


HYPERTROPHIC STENOSIS OF THE PYLORUS 
IN INFANTS 

iEtiology. — Tliere is reasonably good evidence tc) show that 
this disorder is an hereditary" abnormality and that it depends 
upon a recessive abnormal gene, but a chi Id bearing thi.sabnonnal 
pair may not always be affec<^ed. If, liowever, the abnormal 
gene pair is Ix^nie by the first child of the parents, and if the 
infant is a male, he is almost certain to be affected. Sub- 
sequent children who receive the abnormal genes, or a female 
child even if fir.st-lx)rn, are likely to be normal ; the condition, 
therefore, cannot ))e explained on sim]>le Mendelian lincis. 

Clinical Features. — This disorder usually occurs in male 
first-bom infants, and is observed in the second or third week 
of life. It is rare for the onset to occur during the first week ; 
its occurrence is still more rarely seen after the third month. 
The cardinal signs are five in number — vomiting, constipation, 
loss of w^eight, visible gastric j)eristalsi.s, and the presence of a 
pyloric tumour. The vomiting is projectile in character and 
may occur after every feed or at less frequent inter^^als. The 
vomitus consists of ingested food and much mucus. On a 
change of diet the vomiting often diminishes in frequency for 
several days. Constipation is constant and severe, and from 
the point of view of the diagnosis, its presence is of importance. 
Wasting is a prominent feature ; in mild cases, however, it 
may be slight. The j>eristalsis is evident on examination 
immediately after the infant has been fed. Hounded swellings 
of about the size of a golf ball will l^e sw n to jnim across the 
epigastrium from left to right. In the great majority of infants 
with this condition the thickened pylorus may be palpated. On 
abdominal examination it is felt as a liard mass of the size of 
a hazel nut in the right hyix)chondriura. Efforts to feel this 



HYPERTROPHIC PYLORIC STENOSIS 


233 


tumour should be made immediately after feeding, and before 
success is attained the examination may have to be repeated 
several times. Evidence of gastric retention can be obtained 
by passing a stomach tube or by an X-ray examination. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The pylorus is thickened and hard, 
almost cartilaginous, owing to hypertrophy of the circular 
muscular fibres. The stomach is dilated and its wall hyper- 
trophied. A chronic gastritis with excessive mucous secretion 
is often o]>served. 

Diagnosis. — difficulty in diagnosis usually arises from 
confusing the vomiting of hypcTtroj)hic pyloric stenosis with 
that in nutritional disorders. As, however, in the latter, 
diarrhoea rather than constipation is usually present in some 
degree, the presence of constipation in this instance is of 
importance. Vomiting, of course, may he a symptom of other 
constitutional disturbcanees, such as increased intracranial 
pressure, but in these conditions neither visible gastric peristalsis 
nor a pyloric tumour is present. A pyloric tumour will be 
found in the great majority of cases if careful and repeated 
examinations are carried out ; indeed some observers will not 
(‘ommit themselves to a diagnosis of pyloric stenosis imless a 
])yl()ric tumour can be felt. A condition of pyloric spasm without 
ii\^X5rtrophy is allegt'fl to cause difticulty in diagnosis. In this 
all the cardinal signs and symptoms are present })ut no p 3 doric 
tumour can l)e felt. W hilst the author has yet to meet with an 
example of p 3 doros})asm. he is not prepared to deny its existence. 
In general it may be said that if the possibility of stenosis of 
the p\iorus is kept in mind in all cases of persistent vomiting 
in young infants, few cus<‘8 will then be overlooked. 

Treatment. — Infants with pyloric stenosis require surgical 
treatment unless symptoms are mild. The operation of election 
is a division of the muscular fibres of the p 5 dorus, the Predet- 
Ramstedt o}>eration. No less important than the operation 
itself is the management of these patients both before mid after 
the operation has been jx'rforined. Man\’ of these infants have 
been weaned under the mistaken impression that the breast 
milk was the cause of the s^^mptoms ; this action is to be 
deplored, as the outlook is considerably worse in the artificially 
fed. liefore the operation, stomach washes are to be given 
twice daily and, immediately before the ansesthetic is adminis- 
tered, 100 to 200 c.c. of saline and 4 jx3r cent, glucose solution 
may be given per rectum. 

After the operation the infiint sliould be placed in bed on 
the right side with the head a little raised. Feeding is to 
commence as soon as the infant has recovered from the 



234 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


anaesthetic. In the breast fed, 1 drachm of expressed milk is 
given at two-hourly intervals ; in between these feeds a similar 
amount of boiled water is administered. The amount of the 
feeds is increased every six hours by approximately ^ drachm, 
and the intervals between the feeds are also lengthened, so that 
in forty -eight hours after operation 1 oz. of milk is taken every 
three hours, with a similar amount of water in between 
the milk feeds. On the third day after operation the infant 
may be nursed at the breast at three-hourly intervals. 
The artificially fed are to be given feeds of half cream 
dried milk in the same amount as the breast fed, and 
forty-eight hours after operation the full amount for the 
weight may be given. 

In mild cases, or if operative treatment is contra-indicated 
or refused, Eumydrin should be given combined with gastric 
lavage and feeding with human milk ; if this be unobtainable 
an artificial half-cream dried milk can be used. 

The Eumydrin used should be a 0-6 per cent, alcoholic 
solution, two minims are to be given tw^enty minutes after 
each feed, any dehydration present having been corrected. 

The author much prefers surgical treatment but Eumydrin 
is capable of giving good results provided that intercurrent 
infections wliilst under treatment are avoided. 

Results. — The outlook in pyloric stenosis is, on the whole, 
favourable, but is modified by several factors. Breast-fed 
infants show a much higher rate of recovery than the artificially 
fed. The amount of weight lost is of importance ; if this is 
over a quarter of the birth weight, the outlook is bad. 


INFANTILE SCURVY {Barlow's Disease) 

iEtiology. — A diet deficient in vitamin C is the cause of 
scurvy. The proof of this statement rests on three facts — 
firstly, scurvy can be produced at will in animals by withholding 
substances containing vitamin C from their diet ; secondly, 
scinrvy is seen in infants whose diet is deficient in vitamin C ; 
thirdly, both in infants and in animals scurvy is cured both 
quickly and completely by the giving of substances known to 
be rich in vitamin C. 

Vitamin C is found in varying amounts in all fresh fruits 
and vegetables ; it is also contained in fresh milk. This 
vitamin has been isolated in a pure state and is called 
ascorbic acid. Apparently the synthesis of this substanoe 
cannot take place in the body, and animals are dependent for 



INFANTILE SCURVY 235 

their supply on the amounts ingested in the food. The vitamin 
is gradually destroyed by oxidation, and therefore is not found 
in either stale or dried fruits, or in milk that has been heated 
while exposed to air. 

A diet deficient in vitamin C must be taken for a period of 
about six months before symptoms are manifested. 

From these foregoing statements important practical points 
may be deduced : the presence of vitamin C in cow’s milk is 
dependent on the cow receiving a certain amount of fresh fodder ; 
further, the vit€unin C content of the milk can be destroyed 
either by heating the milk or by adding an oxidising agent, 
such as hydrogen peroxide, to preserve the milk ; lastly, none 
but fresh vegetables will contain the anti-scorbutic factor. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The most obvious changes are found at 
the end of the long bones, where growth is most rapid. Sub- 
periosteal hsemorrhages are seen and the periosteum appears 
thickened ; fractures and separation of the epiphysis may be 
present. Haemorrhage into the swollen gums is a common 
finding, and at times haemorrhages may be found elsewhere, 
notably in the skin and in the orbital cavitJ^ The bone marrow 
is yellow and gelatinous instead of the normal red. 

Clinical Features. — Infantile scurvy is seen between the 
ages of six months and eighteen months. It occurs in those 
who have been fed for a long period on a diet which contains 
no anti-scorbutic factor. In breast-fed children it is so rare 
that in these a diagnosis of scurvy should always be questioned. 
Whilst scurvy is not a common disease, it is more often seen 
in the wealthier class of patient than in the hospital class ; 
this difference is due to the fact that the former is more 
likely to be fed on the projirietary foods, w^hich do not 
require the addition of fresh milk. An infant with scurvy 
presents a rather cliaracteristic clinical picture. The patient 
is usually thin and pallid, and is obviously extremely appre- 
hensive of being examined : even to approach the cot is 
enough to cause crying. On examination, if teeth be present, 
the gums will be swollen and red and wull bleed easily. In 
some infants this characteristic gingivitis may be the only 
finding. Hflcmorrhage into the skin is sometimes observed, 
and haemorrhage in the orbit, more particularly into the upjxjr 
lid, is not uncommon. The examination of the limbs is 
important. On inspection, the lower limbs are everted and 
slightly flexed at the hip and knee, and a swelling will be 
observed at the lower end of the femur, producing a fullness 
about the knee ; tliis is usually seen on both sides, but at 
times only one limb is affected ; tliere is an absence of voluntarj’ 



236 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 

movement, producing the “ scorbutic pseudo-paralysis.” Palpa- 
tion will disclose a very tender, iU-delined swelling on the 
lower end of the femur, extending from the lower end of the 
bone as far as half-way up the shaft ; a similar swelling will 
usually be found on the other thigh also. A striking feature 
of the disease is the extreme tenderness of the affected limbs, 
and therefore palpation should be carried out with the greatest 
gentleness and care. At times a separation of the epiphysis is 
observed. Similar changes may take place in the upper ex- 
tremities. In some infants haematemesis and melaena occur. 
Haematuria, which may lead to errors in diagnosis, is often 
found and may be an early symptom. Moderate pyrexia is 
not uncommon. 

In addition to the type already described, attention has 
been called to a latent form of this disease. Pallor, fretfulness, 
failure to gain weight, and slight tenderness of the limbs form 
the clinical picture, which, however, is not very clear. 

X-rays of the bones show decrease in density, giving a 
** ground glass ” appearance, and the zone of provisional 
calcification is marked. Later the shadows of subperiosteal 
haemorrhages may be seen. 

Diagnosis. — Many mistakes have been made from a failure 
to diagnose infantile scurvy. The disease is perhaps more often 
confused with acute rheumatism than with anji^hing else. 
This error should not occur, since infantile scurvy only occurs 
under the age of two, at which ago rheumatism is unknown. 
Scurvy has sometimes been mistaken for syphilitic epiphysitis ; 
here again the age is of help. Syphilitic epiphysitis is a disease 
of early infancy, and is very rarely seen ^tcr the fifth month, 
whilst scurvy is not seen xmtU after that period. Osteomyelitis 
is sometimes the cause of difficulty ; in this condition the 
temperature is usually high, the lesion is usually limited to one 
area, and beyond the tenderness of the bone there are no other 
evidences of scurvy. Pallor arjd haemorrhages may suggest 
either leukaemia or purpura, but in these conditions there is no 
tenderness of bones. Trauma is to be excluded by the history. 
The hyi>eraB8thetic form of anterior poliomyelitis may cause 
difficulty, but here the hyperaesthesia is general, with no points 
of special tenderness. The haematuria may give rise to mis- 
takes ; both neoplasm of the kidney and nephritis have been 
erroneously diagnosed as scmrvy. It may be said that scurvy 
will not be overlooked if the possibility of its ocourrenoe is 
kept in mind. 

Treatment* — Few disorders in medicine respond to treatment 
more quickly and more completely than scurvy. Furthermore, 



RICKETS 


237 


the disease can, and should, be easily prevented. The daily 
administration of orange juice is all that is required. From the 
second month a start should be made with ^ drachm twice a 
day, and the amount should be gradually increased until by 
the fourth month 1 oz. a day is being taken ; this amount 
should be continued throughout early childhood. If necessary, 
it may be diluted with water and a little cane sugar added. 
If orange juice be unobtainable, 25 mg. of ascorbic acid should 
be given daily. When scurvy is present, the administration 
of orange juice should be begun at once, amounts of several 
drachms at first, increasing to 1 or 2 oz. within a few days, 
or alternatively ascorbic acid up to 300 mg. daily should 
be given. Vegetable mashes and a tablespoonful daily of a 
baked and mashed potato should be given if the age of the 
infant permits. The diet as a whole should be readjusted. 
If necessary, the limbs are to be splinted, and the infant should 
l>e moved as little as possible. Under this treatment recoverj" 
is rapid ; the tenderness and haemorrhages disappear in a 
few days ; the periosteal swellings are, however, absorbed 
much more slowly. Occasionally, after all scorbutic symptoms 
have disappeared, trouble is experienced with diarrhoea and 
vomiting, but as a rule recovery is rapid and complete. 

RICKETS 

£tiology. — Our knowledge of rickets has been considerably 
advanced by the investigations of recent years, notably those 
by Mellanby, Findlay, and M‘CoUum. 

In this disease the essential fault is inabUitv of the body 
to lay down calcium phosphate in newly formed bone tissue ; 
this error results in incomplete calcification, with subsequent 
bending and distortion of the relatively soft bone. This failure 
of calcification is due to an alteration of the normal proportions 
of calcium and phosphorus in the blood. The normal infant 
has 10 mg. of calcium and 5 mg. of phosphorus in every 100 c.c, 
of blood ; in infants with active rickets the amomit of calcium 
is normal, but the phosphorus falls below 3 mg. per 100 c.c. of 
blood and the plasma phosphatase is raised. At first sight 
it appears that the deficient calcification is due to the lowered 
phosphorus in the blood, but there is some evidence to show 
that this result is caused by an alteration of tlie normal pro- 
portions between calcium and phosphorus rather than to the 
diminution of phosphorus alone, as bone changes, apparently 
rachitic, may occur in conditions in wliich the blood phosphorus 
is liigher than normal (renal rickets). 



238 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


The diminished amoimt of blood phosphorus in the rachitic 
child is the result either of a diminished amount of a substance, 
vitamin D, in the diet, or the inadequate formation of this same 
vitamin in the body. Vitamin D is present to a variable extent 
in most animal fats ; it is found in human milk, and is most 
abundant in halibut or cod-liver oil ; it is also formed in the 
skm when this is irradiated with ultra-violet light. 

It is only the growing child who develops rickets, and 
therefore tliis disease is usually seen in those infants who are 
being fed on artificial foods containing a large amount of carbo- 
hydrates, which make for rapid growth but at the same time 
are deficient in those animal fats which contain vitamin D. 
A deficiency of milk in the diet thus depriving the infant of 
the necessary calcium for bone formation may also be a factor. 
Further, when infants are fed on this kind of diet and are not 
exposed to any source of ultra-violet light, such as ordinary 
sunlight, the onset of the disease is more certain and its course 
more severe. While breast feeding prevents rickets, the 
protection it gives is by no means absolute, as some infants 
fed on this diet will develop the disease. 

The means by w hich vitamin D maintains the phosphorus 
content of the blood is unknowm, but there is some evidence 
to show that the absorption of both calcium and phosphorus is 
increased when it is administered. 

Vitamin D has now been isolated ; it can be produced 
in the laboratory by subjecting ergosterol to ultra-violet 
radiations, and it is by this means that vitamin D is formed in 
the skin when this is exposed to ultra-violet light. 

Morbid Anatomy. — In rickets the most characteristic 
changes are found in the bones. Examination of these struc- 
tures by the naked eye reveals enlargement at the junction 
of epiphysis and diai)hysis ; the bone is often bent and green- 
stick fractures are not uncommon. The periosteum is thickened 
and h 3 rperaimic. On longitudinal section the epiphyseal line is 
seen to be thick and irregular. These changes are most marked 
at the lower ends of the bones of the forearm, the lower ends of 
the femora, and upi^er ends of the tibia3 ; they are very notice- 
able at the costo-chondral junctions of the ribs, and are found 
to a lesser degree in every bone. Microscopical examination 
of the junction between epiphysis and diaphysis shows the 
absence of provisional calcification of the cartilage with 
extremely irregular penetration of the marrow capillaries in 
between very irregular rows of cartilage cells. Where the 
capillaries have penetrated, osteoblasts have accompanied them 
and have laid down tissue morphologically like bone, but 



RICKETS 


239 


uncalcified. This is the so-called “ osteoid tissue,” which is 
bulky and soft and accounts for the “ enlargement of the 
epiphysis ” of rickets. 

Clinical Features. — Rickets is of widespread occurrence in 
all countries of the temperate zones. It occurs but rarely in 
the tropics, and then only in infants shut off from sunlight. 
Urban life is a factor in the development of the disease. It 
occurs with great severity in dark-skinned races, such as the 
negro and the Italian, when they attempt to live in northern 
countries where there is little sun. It is much more frequent 
in the artificially fed than in the breast-fed child. 

An infant does not show evidence of rickets until the 
fourth month at the earliest, and the signs are most apparent 
between the sixth and eighteenth months. The first evidences 
of rickets are restlessness, irritability, and sweating of the head. 
The latter is very noticeable during sleep. Some time later 
the characteristic features are found : the child is usually well 
nourished but anaemic ; the head is large and square, with a 
widely open fontanelle and bossing of the frontal and parietal 
bones ; dentition is delayed ; the thorax shows enlargement of 
the costo-chondral junctions — the “ rachitic rosary ” ; later, 
other deformities are seen, such as pigeon breast and Harrison's 
groove, the latter being an indentation running transversely 
around the chest wall at the level of the xiphistemum ; the 
abdomen is large and protuberant; the spleen and Uver are 
palpable ; the bones show enlargement at the epiphyses, which 
is very noticeable at the wrists and ankles ; the bones, also, 
being soft, are bent both by muscular action and the weight 
of the body ; the muscles are flabby and the ligaments relaxed, 
enabling abnormal postures to be assumed. These changes in 
bones, muscles, and ligaments delay the physical development 
of the child, and thus a child with rickets stands and walks late. 

The radiographic appearances of a rachitic bone are 
characteristic. The sh^t of the bone and the centres of 
ossification tlirow a much diminished shadow, due to the lack 
of calcium salts ; the end of the bone is broadened and cupped, 
and the surface irregular with a shadowy fringe hanging 6t)m 
it. These changes are beet seen at the lower end of the radius, 
ulna, and femur. 

Complications. — Infants with rickets have a lowered 
immunity to infections. Bronchitis and broncho-pneumonia are 
common amongst these children, and gastro-intestinal disturb- 
ances are frequent. Gienerai convulsions, carpo-pedal spasm, 
and laryngismus stridulus have a direct relation to rickets, 
which is discussed below in the chapter on “ Tetany.” 



240 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


Diagnosis. — Mild cases are not easy to diagnose ; the most 
reliable signs are increased plasma phosphatase and the X-ray 
appearances of the bones. On clinical examination probably 
the earliest sign is enlargement of the costochondral junctions : 
it must not be forgotten that these are palpable in normal 
infants. The square bossed head may be confounded with 
the globular head of hydrocephalus. The delay in walking 
produced by mental deficiency or a cerebral palsy may be 
ascribed to rickets. The history of the infant and a careful 
examination will usually clear up any doubts. The rachitic 
spinal cui'vature (usually kyphotic) may be ascribed to tuber- 
culous caries of the spine ; the rachitic curve is neither angular 
nor painful, no reflex rigidity of muscles is found, and the 
deformity can be straightened out by susj)ension. 

Lastly, there is no such disease as scurvy rickets.’' An 
infant may, of course, develop both rickets and scurvy 
simultaneously, but this is very rare. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis in rickeks is good, but the liability 
of rachitic infants to infections is not to be overlooked. Rachitic 
deformities show a remarkable tendency to di8apj[)ear with the 
passage of time. 

Prevention and Treatment. — Both cod-liver oil and ultra- 
violet light cure rickets ; more important still is the fact that 
the administration of either of these two agents will prevent 
the onset of the disease. 

In infants, both naturally and artificaally fell, it is desirable to 
give cod-liver oil from the third month ; enough should be giv^en 
to ensure that the infant is receiving approximately 700 units 
of vitamin D by the sixth month. This amount is contained in 
1 drachm of National cod-liver oil. This should be continued 
until the child is throe years old. The finv cliildren wlio arc 
unalfle to tolerate the oil may be exposed to ultra-violet radia- 
tions, or given one of the artificial })rej)aratioas of vitamin D. 

When the disease hasdeveloped, both cod-liver oil and exposure 
to ultra-violet light may bo cm[)loycd together, in order to 
increase the supply of vitamin I) as quickly as |K>Hsible, and any 
fault such as a deficiency of milk in tlie diet must be rectifi^i. 

Massage and splinting are indi(;ated for the defonnities, and 
iron for the anamiia so often jaesent. 

INFANTILE TETANY (Spasniaphilia) 

JStiology. — Biochemical investigations have added much to 
our knowledge of infantile tetany in rc^cent years. They have 
shown that, in this condition, there is a diminution of the 



INFANTILE TETANY 241 

oalciiim content of the blood, which may fall from the normal 
10 mg. per 100 c.c. of blood to a figure as low as 5 mg. per 
100 c.c. It is known that the calcium ion exerts a sedative 
action on the nervous system, both central and i)eripheral, and 
therefore the direct result of the lowering of the calcium is that 
state of hyperexcitability which is called tetany. 

Theoretically, this faU in calcium may be produced in 
several ways : injury to the parathyroid glands, a disturbance 
of the acid base equihbrium in the blood, abnormal intestinal 
states which prevent the absorption of calcium, and lastly, 
a disturbance of calcium -phosphorus metabolism which occurs 
in rickets. It is this last condition which is responsible for 
tetany in the majority of infants. 

Tetany, therefore, may be regarded as a comphcation of 
rickets, and this view is supported by clinical evidence in that 
the great majority of infants with tetany show obvious signs of 
rickets. Further, tetany is usually seen in the spring and early 
summer, at the time of year, in fact, when rickets tends to 
heal. 

Some observers have described changes in the parath;>Toid 
glands of infants suffering from tetan}", and it is possible that 
injury to these structures may be the cause of this condition 
in a few cases. The influence of an alteration in the acid-base 
balance of the blood may play a definite part, for it has been 
showm that the ionisation of calcium in the blood bears a 
relationship to the alkah reserve of the body. When this is 
increased the calcium ionisation is diminished, and it is only 
in an ionised form that the calcium exerts a sedative action 
on the nervous system. How great a part alterations in the 
acid-base equihbrium of the body play in the production of 
infantile tetany is somewhat uncertain. Other conditions, 
such as acute infections and hereditary predisposition, have 
been regarded as the cause of tetany, but probably acute 
infections do no more than make a latent tetany manifest. 

Clinical Features. — The incidence of tetany naturally follows 
that of rickets. It occurs in infants who are between the sixth 
and twenty -fourth month ; in premature infants, however, it 
may occur as early as the third or fourth month. It is rarely 
seen in the breast-fed, because rickets is uncommon in these 
infants. 

Infants with tetany may be divided into two groups : (a) 
those with open manifestations, and (6) those in whom the 
signs are latent ; the latter group is the larger. 

(a) The open manifestations are carpo-pedal spasms, 
general convulsions, and laryngismus stridulus. 

i6 



242 


DISEASES OP INFANTS 


1. Carpo-pedal spasms are tonic spasms of the hands and 
feet. The fingers are fiexed at the metacarpo-phalangeal joints 
and the phalanges are extended over the adducted thumbs ; 
the wrists are flexed and the hand is drawn to the ulnar side. 
In severe cases, movement at the wrist is restricted. The feet 
are extended and the first phalanges of the toes are flexed. 
If the spasms persist for several days, oedema of the dorsal 
surfaces of both hands and feet may develop. Carpo-pedal 
spasm is not common. 

2. General convulsions are a common manifestation of 
tetany. They differ in no way from convulsions due to other 
causes, and they can only be recognised as due to tetany 
by examination of the calcium content of the blood and by 
eliminating other causes of convulsions. 

3. Laryngismus stridulus is the name given to a ])artial 
spasm of the larjmx, producing a crowing sound with each 
inspiration, which is particularly noticeable when the child is 
crying. At times the spasm of the larynx is so marked as to 
cause complete arrest of respiration, resulting in cyanosis and 
occasionally in conv^ulsions. 

(6) The latent manifestations of tetany are Erb's sign, 
Chvostek s facial sign, and Trousseau s sign. 

1. Erb’s sign is a raised excitability to electrical stimulation. 
The test is carried out by the application of the galvanic current 
to the nerves. The peroneal nerve is usually chosen. The 
most important of the tests is the cathodal oj>ening contraction ; 
if this occurs with a current of less strength than 5 miUiamperes 
it is positive evidence of tetany. 

2. Chvostek 8 facial sign is present when contraction of the 
facial muscles occurs on the facial nerve being lightly tapped 
with the fingers midway between the zygoma and the angle of 
the mouth. This sign can only be relied upon when the patient 
is under two years of age. 

3. Trousseau s sign is elicited by applying pressure to the 
upper arm sufficient to arrest the circulation ; if the sign be 
present, the hand will immediately assume the typical position 
of carpo-pedal spasm. This sign may not be present in well- 
marked tetany. 

Diagnosis. — ITie diagnosis of infantile tetany, particularly 
when convulsions only are present, may l>e difficult. Carpo- 
pedal spasm, lorjmgismus stridulus, and h>b s sign are patho- 
gnomonic, but these may be absent. I'he age limit of tetany 
and the usual coincident signs of rickets may enable a diagnosis 
of tetany to be made, and this condition should always be 
suspected as a cause of convulsions in an infant who is between 



INFANTILE TETANY 243 

six months and two years and has no evidence of an organic 
brain lesion. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis in latent tetany is good. In the 
open type, death may occur either during a convulsion or 
during an attack of laryngeal spasm ; the prognosis should 
therefore be guarded. Pertussis is an exceptionally unfavour- 
able complication of tetany. 

Treatment. — The treatment of infantile tetany may be 
considered under two headings : — 

1. Treatment of Latent Tetany , — The treatment of this 
condition really resolves itself into treatment for the associated 
rickets. Adequate doses of cod-liver oil are to be given, and 
exposure to ultra-violet radiations may be employed as an 
adjuvant. The infant’s diet should l>e reviewed and steps be 
taken to alter it should this be considered neces8ar\\ 

2. Treatment of Open Tetany, — Here, in addition to the 
treatment outlined above, steps must l)e taken to treat the 
active manifestations. lmj)rovement will be effected if the diet 
is changed from a sweet ” to an acid ” milk mixture ; milk 
\\dth 1 drachm of lactic acid (B.P.) to the pint may be used. 
Further, there is need for the administration of calcium salts, 
as calcium gluconate 20 gr. three times daily. The general 
convulsions should be treated with an initial dose of an aperient, 
followed by a short jx^riod, six to twelve hours, of starvation ; 
later, acid milk should he given %\ith calcium gluconate. It 
may be necessaiy to control the convuL^ions by bromides and 
chloral. 

With active manifestations both cod-liver oil and ultra- 
violet light should be employed together in order to increase 
the anti-racliitic factor as soon as possible. 


C(ELIAC DISEASE 

{Chronic Intcstiiuil huligcstion) 

iSltiology. — The cause of coeliac disease is unknown. It is 
seen both in children who have been the subjects of long- 
continued nutritional disturbances in infancy, and in those 
who have received a diet containing a disproportionate amount 
of fat and protein. The essential feature of the disease is 
intolerance of ingested fat and carbohjdrate ; a very small 
amoimt of these two articles of food provokes and exacerbates 
the symptoms. 

A diminution or lack of pancreatic and intestinal ferments 
has been suggested as the cause of this disorder. Other ol^ervers 



244 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


have claimed that the condition is due to a lack of bile, and 
still others that it is due to a chronic infection, but not one 
of these theories is an adequate explanation of the cause. 

Morbid Anatomy.-^In the few examples of coeliac disease 
on which an autopsy has been performed, no very definite 
findings have been recorded. There is usually a dilatation of 
the intestines, particularly obvious in the colon, and the 
intestinal mucosa is atrophied. The liver has been reported to 
be smaller than normal, and occasionally there has been some 
increase of fibrous tissue in the pancreas. 

Clinical Features. — Coeliac disease is seen in children between 
one and five years of age. It is more common in children of the 
upper and middle classes. The onset is insidious, with loss of 
weight and looseness of the bowels. The patient is undersized 
and underweight ; there is absence of subcutaneous fat. The 
most striking feature is the enlargement of the abdomen, due 
to the pressure of an abnormal amount of gas, which results 
from excessive intestinal fermentation ; another factor in the 
enlargement is atony of the intestinal musculature, which allows 
distension to take place easily. The size of the abdomen is apt 
to vary, the day measurement being three or foxu* inches more 
than that of the night. The stools are characteristic, being 
bulky, pale in colour, of foul odour, and often frothy ; from 
four to five are passed during the tventy-four hours. The 
stools on analysis show a marked excess of fat but this is 
properly split. Periods of constipation may occur, but oven 
then the stools retain their l)ulk, pallor, and offensiveness. 
There is considerable general muscular weakness, and walking 
may be delayed. Associated with these symptoms is a curious 
mental state. The children are irritable and capricious ; 
usually they are precocious and often show a curious interest 
in their symptoms, and may Ix^come quite hjqK^chondriacal. 
At times the knee jerks may be absent, and a general but 
slight oedema may develop. When cmliacj disease is of long 
standing, bone deformities may occur. These are not seen in 
children under the age of seven ; they are a])j>arently rachitic 
in nature and may be cured by the giving of ultra-violet radia- 
tions if the patient is on a fat-free dietary. Tetany is also an 
occasional complication of this disorder. 

Diagnosii. — The diagnosis of coeliac disease does not as a 
rule present difficulties. It is apt to l>e confused with Hirsch- 
sprung s congenital dilatation of the colon ; but in this condition 
there are periods of prolonged constipation dating from birth, 
and this history enables the correct diagnosis to be made. 
Tuberculous peritonitis is a more frequent cause of difficulty, 



(XELIAC DISEASE 


245 


and in this case the correct diagnosis may only be reached 
after fairly long observation. 

Prognosis.— Children with coehac disease rarely fail to 
recover, but the condition is a serious one and entails a long 
period of ill-health. Some recover comparatively quickly with 
proper treatment, and in a few years will have attained normal 
development ; in many, however, digestive difficulties wiD 
persist, and recovery will not take place until puberty is 
reached. Co-operation in treatment on the part of child and 
parents will materially hasten the rate of recovery. 

Treatment. — The treatment of coeliac disease is difficult and 
trying to all concerned. The patient is usually spoilt and 
difficult to control ; if possible, the services of an efficient 
nurse should be obtained. The essential part of the treatment 
is dietetic, and it is to be remembered that as intolerance of 
fat and carbohydrate is present, a diet must be constructed 
which is composed to a great extent of protein food. At first 
the diet should consist of buttermilk or protein milk ; this 
should be continued until the stools are firm, the abdominal 
distension is slight, and the appetite good : thfe? stage is usually 
reached in a few dajns. Then almas t pure protein foods aie 
added, such as curds, minced meats, gelatine and white of egg ; 
later the whole egg may be taken. In this second stage 
bananas are undoubtedly of much value ; one may be given 
at the end of the first week, and the supply may be increased 
by one daily until four to six are taken. As a rule, this addition 
to the diet is welcomed. When the patient is apparently 
progressing on this diet the addition of carbohydrate must be 
made, but great caution is to be exercised. Preparations of 
dextrin and maltose may be given, beginning with 1 drachm a 
day and gradually increasing to 2 oz. ; later, vegetables may be 
added and the diet gradually built up. Bread, cereal foods, 
and potatoes are the last to be allowed. If carbohydrates are 
allowed too freely and too quickly a relapse will almost cer- 
tainly occur, and a new start may have to be made. In dieting 
these children the vitamin supply must not be overlooked ; 
orange juice may be given from the commencement of treat- 
ment, and non-fatty preparations containing vitamin D are to 
be included. 

Relapses are common and disheartening, and will call for a 
restriction of the diet. In the early stages of treatment these 
patients are best in bed. For the ansemia, iron is indicated, 
r^tly, recent work has suggested that the administration 
of the vitamin B complex may open up a new therapeutic 
vista in, this disease. Ultra-violet radiation is often of l)enefit. 



246 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


CYCLIC VOMITING 

iEtiology. — The cause of cj^clic vomiting is imknown. It 
occurs in the highly strung active child and is very apt to 
follow some unusual excitement such as a children’s party, 
or some unwonted fatigue such as a railway journey ; again, in 
children hable to this condition it is seen as a complication of 
a minor iUiiess, such as tonsillitis. It is the nervous child 
that suffers from cyclic vomiting, and often one or other of 
the parents ^vill have suffered from the same condition in 
childhood. 

There is evidence to indicate that cyclic vomiting is a 
disturbance of metabohsm. During the atteck large amounts 
of ketone bodies are excreted in the urine, and the amount of 
sugar in the blood has been 8ho\^’n to be lower than normal. 
The significance of these findings is doubtful, but it has been 
suggested that these patients metabolise fats less easily than 
normal children, because they are unable to draw upon the 
carbohydrate reserves in their bodies to oxidise all of the ingested 
fats. By this hypothesis the low blood sugar and ketonuria 
are explained the low blood sugar is, howevxT, by no means a 
constant finding, and one Ls j)erhaps not justified, according to 
present knowledge, in saying more than that cyclic vomiting 
is due to some fault in metabolism. 

Clinical Features. — (Cyclic vomiting usually begins betw^een 
the ages of two and four, but it may occur in infancy. The 
type of child in whom it occurs has already been outlined. 
It is more often seen in private than in hospital practice. 

The attacks of vomiting occur at variable intervals — as 
often as one a week, as infrequently as one in six montlis ; 
the actual attack lasts usually about three days. Often there 
are prodromata, languor, headache, anorexia, and abdominal 
discomfort, which last for twenty-four hours ; then the vomiting 
begins and overshadows everything else. It occurs after 
anything ingested, and continues both day and night at frequent 
intervals, often every half-hour or so. The temperature is 
often a little raised, up to 100"^ F. ; thirst is excessive, but any 
attempt to satisfy it provokes the vomiting anew ; the bowels 
are confined ; the httle urine that is pass^ is highly concen- 
trated and contains ketone bociies. 

Some hours after the onset in severe cases, signs of 
exhaustion begin to appear, the pulse bewmes rapid, the eyes 
sunken, the complexion of an ashy grey colour, and the patient 
may appear to be at the point of death. On examination there 



CYCLIC VOMITING 247 

may be slight epigastric tenderness due to the repeated vomiting ; 
the abdomen as a whole is sunken. About the third day the 
intervals between the attacks of vomiting lengthen, some fluid 
may be retained, and then the vomiting ceases. Convalescence 
from the attack is very rapid, and in a few days the patient is 
up and about. 

Diagnosis. — The diagnosis of cyclic vomiting is usually not 
difficult, for the history of previous attacks leads, as a rule, to 
the correct interpretation of the symptoms. The first attack, 
however, may cause difficulty, and may suggest the onset of 
meningitis. Other conditions, such as acute gastritis, intus- 
susception, and appendicitis, causing vomiting, must not be 
overlooked. Further, organic disease of the brain or kidneys 
has to be excluded by careful examination. In children who 
are the subjects of this disorder, care must be taken not to 
assume that the symptoms present are due to an attack of 
cyclic vomiting without excluding other conditions. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis in cyclic vomiting is good. 
Although often patients appear to be desperately UJ, recovery 
is the rule ; theie are, however, a few fatal caises on record. 
Attacks usually cease at puberty ; occasionally attacks of 
migraine may take their place. 

Treatment. — 'I'hc treatment may be considered in two 
divisions : — 

1. Durii^jg an Attack . — Once the vomiting has commenced 
notliing seems to l)e able to control it. An attempt may be 
made to give small amounts of a solution of 10 per cent, glucose 
with 10 gr. of sodium bicarbonate in water by mouth every 
two hours ; but usually this only provokes the vomiting anew. 

lienefit is obtained by rectal injections of 5 to 6 oz. of 
5 per cent, glucose and saline solution with i dr. of sodium 
bicarbonate, if they can be retained. If collapse is verj^ severe, 
subcutaneous saline may be necessary. 

When the vomiting begins to abate, food in small quantities 
in a liquid fonn may be given. 

2. Bettveen Attacks. — All forms of excitement are to be 
avoided. The fats in the diet should be much restricted ; it 
is often a^ivisable to give the milk skimmed. Considerable 
benefit will l>e obtained by giving 15 to 30 gr. of sodium 
bicarbonate throe times a day after food for a long period. 
Liquid glucose should also be administered in dessertspoonful 
doses three times a day after me^ls. A weekly mercurial 
purge ia advisable. 

Prodromata should be treated with a brisk purge and 
drachm doses of liquid glucose every hour. 



248 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


CONVULSIONS IN INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN 

iEtiology. — Convulsions are common in infancy and early 
childhood. The primary cause of the increased liability at 
this period of life is generally ascribed to an instability of 
the infantile brain, consequent on its immaturity. The 
secondary' causes acting on this unstable mass of nerve tissue 
are various and some of them are unknown, but it is by 
means of these secondary causes that it is possible to divide 
convulsions into three groups. Firstly, symptomatic convul- 
sions which are due to obvious organic changes in the brain 
or its membranes ; secondly, toxic convulsions resulting from 
morbid changes in other parts of the body or alterations 
in the body fluids ; thirdly, functional convulsions of un- 
known origm and accompanied by no apparent alteration 
of stnicture. 

The first group includes convulsions due to haemorrhage 
into the brain or meninges caused by the transit of the head 
through the maternal passages at birth ; in this group also are 
placed the convulsions caused )>y the different varieties of 
meningitis, by intracranial tumours, by polio-encephalitis, 
and those associated with maldevelopment, or degenerative 
processes of the brain. 

The second group includes convulsions due to tetany ; 
those seen at the onset of the acute specific fevers and of other 
infections such as pneumonia ; convulsions due to uraemia and 
lead-poisoning ; and, lastly, those seen in states of asphyxia. 

In the third group are placed those convuLsions which have 
no apparent cause. In this group are included those children 
who are said to have epilepsy. 

Morbid Anatomy. — In irifants with convulsioas which are 
either symptomatic or toxic, the findings at autojjsy will 
naturally depend on the immediate exciting cause. In infants 
who have died from functional convulsion.s the only findings 
are punctate haemorrhages 8(?attered throughout the brain, 
with distension of the right side of the heart and congestion 
of the lungs. 

Clinical Features. — A convulsion l)egins wdth pallor, slight 
twitching of the facial muscles, and fixation of the eyes ; after 
a few moments the muscular twitchings spread over the body 
and become more marked, the head is thrown back, the hands 
are clenched ; then definite clonic movements of the extremities 
appear. Slight cyanosis is seen, consciousness is lost, and there 
is often gome slight frothing at the mouth. The breathing is 



CONVULSIONS IN INFANTS 


249 


shallow, the pulse is weak, and the bladder and rectum may be 
emptied. The convulsive movements vary in intensity ; at 
times they are very striking. They are usually bilateral and 
synchronous, but occasionally one side of the body is alone 
affected. The seizure is very variable in duration, lasting for 
a few moments or as long as half an hour ; at the end of it the 
patient is left stuporous. Paralyses of a transient character 
are sometimes seen after the attack, and prostration is constant. 
A convulsion is apt to be followed by others in the few days 
succeeding it. 

Diagnosis. — The recognition of a convulsion is usually easy, 
but the determination of the exciting cause is often diJBBcuit. 
A consideration of the patient’s age is important. During the 
first three months of life, and more particularly in the few weeks 
immediately subsequent to birth, convulsions are usually due 
to haemorrhage or injury sustained during birth ; from six to 
eighteen months of age tetany is by far the most common 
cause ; after the age of two, recurrent convulsions in an 
otherwise apparently healthy child may be epileptic. 

It is important to realise that, should fever be present, a 
convulsion may herald the onset of an acute infection, either 
of the central nervous system or elsewhere in the body. 

Convulsions associated with defecti\e cerebral development 
are recognised by the presence of evidence of mental deficiency ; 
when they are caused by cerebral tumours, or associated with 
cerebral palsies, definite physical signs, indicative of disease of 
the central nervous system, will be found on examination. It 
must be borne in mind that ursemia is a possible cause of 
convulsions. In the terminal stages of other illnesses, con- 
vulsions are usually caused by asphyxia. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis depends to a great extent on the 
exciting cause of the convulsion, and will therefore differ 
accordingly. The convulsion itself, unless prolonged and 
recurrent or occurring iis a terminal event in some other illness, 
is rarely fatal. In addition to the immediate outlook the 
remote prospect is to bo considered. Convulsions due to 
organic causes usually i>ersist, but those due to tetany clear 
up as a rule emd leave no trace. With repeated convulsions in 
children over the age of two, the {xxssibility of epilepsy is 
always to be considered. 

Treatment. — During a con\nilsion, the time-honoured treat- 
ment of immersing the infant iii a mustard bath is of value. 
If the attack still persists, the adnnnistration of chloroform 
will have an immediate effect. To prevent a recurrence, 
chloral is to be given. The dose at six months is 4 gr., and it 



250 


DISEASES OF INFANTS 


should be injected through a catheter high into the bowel. 
This may be repeated in an hour, if necessary. In addition, 
bromides may be given by the mouth : 6 gr. of sodium bromide 
being a suitable dose for an infant of six months. 

Once the attack has been controlled, search is to be made 
for the exciting cause, and this must be treated, if possible. 

A. G. Maitland-Jones. 



DISEASES DUE TO PHYSICAL 
AGENTS, POISONINGS, AND 
INTOXICATIONS 

SEA-SICKNESS 

U NPLEASANT symptoms, which include nausea, vomiting, 
giddiness, headache and diplopia, may occur as the result 
of unaccustomed motion either on the sea or in the air, 
or even in a train or motor car. Common though the condition 
is, there is still no agreement as to its aetiology and it is 
variously attributed to labyrinthine or ocular disturbances, 
acidosis, or even hysteria. *Sea-sickncs8 is rare in infants and 
the aged and it is si)eeially common in those subject to 
migraine and cyclical vomiting. 

The symptoms of sea-sickness are unfortunately too familiar 
to need description, but it is important not to overlook more 
serious conditions, such as appen^citis or perforation. 

Treatment. — Susceptible jx^rsons should take a good meal 
with plenty of carbohydrate and strictly limited fat an hour 
or two before embarking. During the voyage glucose (1 oz. in 
a glass of orangeade) should be taken at frequent intervals, 
in order to avoid ketosis. Sedative drugs are valuable, 
particularly chloretone, which may be taken in 5-gr. doses 
in cachet form. Phenobarbitone (1 gr. t.d.s.) is also sometimes 
beneficial. Subjects of sea-sickness should remain recumbent 
in a warm ventilated cabin, situatecl, if possible, amidships. 


CAISSON DISEASE 

The term caisson disease has been applied to the clinical 
syndrome which may result from too rapid decompression after 
oxjKmure to a high atmospheric pressure, such as may be required 
in a caisson or a diving helmet. During the period in which a 
worker is exposed to a high pressure, the increased partial 
pressure of nitrogen results in an excess of this gas going into 

251 



252 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

solution in the fluids and tissues of the body. If the pressure 
falls quickly the excess of nitrogen is released as bubbles of gas, 
which may form in any part of the body, but particularly in 
the central ner^^ous system. If, however, the pressure is 
allowed to fall gradually, the liberated nitrogen can be absorbed 
into the blood and excreted through the lungs. 

Similar symptoms may develop with ascent U) high altitudes 
in aeroplanes ; a man can remain indefinitely at 18,000 ft. 
( = ^ atmospheric pressure) without risk of bubble formation, 
but if the altitude is over 30,000 ft. ( — J atmospheric pressure) 
many men show symptoms within one hour. 

The symptoms of caisson disease will depend on the localisa- 
tion of the bubbles of nitrogen and on their size. When occurring 
in the subcutaneous fat or in the muscles, the bubbles produce 
acute local pain ; in the alimentary tract, passage of nitrogen 
from the tissues into the lumen of the gut leads to distension, 
abdominal pain, and vomiting. Serious symptoms result 
from hberation of gas in the central nervous 83 " 8 tem. The 
lower dorsal segments of the spinal cord are most frequently 
affected and a paraplegia, transient or i)ermanent, results. 
In severe cases the patient may die very rapidly as the result 
of nitrogen being liberated in the blood in large quantities. 

Caisson disease may be prevented bj^ gradual decompression. 
No matter how great the degree of compression, nor for how^ long 
it has been operating, a man maj^ with complete safety’ be im- 
mediatelydecorapressed to half the maximum compression value. 
Thus a man working at 6 atmospheres ma\" be quickly decom- 
pressed to 3 atmospheres ; ho must then w ait at that pressure for 
a time dependent on the duration of exposure to high pressure. 

Symptoms do not usually occur until half an hour or more 
after decompression is complete. The patient must immediately 
be again exposed to the same increasofl pressure as that under 
which he had been working. Tliis results in the reabsorption 
of the nitrogen, and decompression may then lyo allow^ to 
take place extremely slowly. Symptoms usually disappear 
rapidly, but occasionally a permanent paraplegia remains. Fat 
is able to absorb relatively more nitrogen than other tissues, 
and it is therefore advisable to forbid the ol>e8e to work under 
high pressures. 


ANOXIA 

Low atmospheric pressure, such as is experienced by moun- 
taineers, or more often in aeroplanes at a high altitude, involves 
a lowered partial pressure of oxygen in the inspired air. At 



.HEAT-STROKE 


253 


heights of 12,000 ft. or over, symptoms due to lack of oxygen 
become apparent, more particularly on exertion. Although the 
depth of respiration is increased there is little sensation of 
being short of breath. The intellectual faculties are dulled 
and sensory perception impaired. There is often marked 
drowsiness and lethargy ; in some subjects euphoria or irrita- 
bility may be prominent features. With more extreme anoxia, 
such as occurs in an aeroplane at 20,000 ft. or over there is 
great loss of muscular power which may amount to complete 
paralysis and unconsciousness, or death may supervene. If 
oxygen is administered recovery is rapid and there is often 
complete amnesia. The onset of symptoms is insidious, and 
usually the subject is completely unaware that anything is 
wrong. Hence anoxia is most dangerous in a pilot of an air- 
craft, particularly in war, and it is essential that adequate 
oxygen should be taken early enough to prevent the onset of 
symptoms. 

Residence at high altitudes results in an increase both in 
the red-cell coimt and the haunoglobin content of the blood. 


HEAT-STROKE 

Exposure to the sun may produce headache, dizziness, 
vomiting, and sonietunes fainting attacks. Such symptoms 
have been termed heat exhaustion. 

In the tropics heat-stroke is prone to occur. Exposure to 
the sun’s rays is not necessarj’^ ; in fact the majority of cases 
occur while the patient is indoors. A moist heat, unsuitable 
clothing, and lack of ventilation are factors in its production. 

Healthy persons rarely develop heat-stroke. Most cases 
occur among those who are either actually already ill from 
some febrile disease or whose general health is poor as the 
result of alcoholic excess or other factors. 

The onset of symptoms is usually sudden ; when heat-stroke 
occurs in a patient suffering from a pyrexial disease such as 
malaria, coma may be almost the first sjuiptom. Some- 
times there is a prodromal period of restlessness, vertigo, and 
vomiting ; the patient ceases to perspire, and frequency of 
micturition is often an early symptom. The rectal tempera- 
ture rises rapidly and may reach 1 10® F. The patient 
becomes comatose, incontinent and convulsed ; the skin feels 
burning hot and is congested or cyanotic. Death may occur 
within a few hours wi^ cardiac and respiratory failure. If 
the patient survives, the temperature often rem a ins slightly 



254 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

elevated for some days. During oonvalesoenoe persistent 
headache and mental disturbances may occur. 

Treatment. — The results are often dramatic. Within half 
an hour the patient, previously cyanosed and convulsed, may 
be restored to practically a normal condition. The temperature 
must be reduced as rapidly os possible to about 102° F. To 
save hfe, treatment must be both vigorous and immediate. 
Stripped naked, the patient is laid on an iron bedstead covered 
with matting {permeable to air ; ho is then sprayed with cold 
water and kept under a fan ; the rectal temperature is taken 
at five-minute inter\'als, as it is imjx)rtant to cease action 
treatment as soon as it falls to between 102° and 103° F. When 
the p\Texia has fallen sufficiently, the patient is put to bed and 
carefully watched for a recurrence of hyperpyrexia. For 
collapse, hot-water bottles should be applied. Consciousness 
is usually regained very rapidly as the temperature falls. In 
every case in which malaria is a possible factor, an immediate 
dose of 10 gi\ of quinine bihydrochloride should be given 
intravenously. When there is much congestion, venesection 
is beneficial. Violent convulsions may necessitate induction 
of Ught ana?sthesia. When sufliciently recovennl to travel, 
the patient should be removed to a cooler climate owing to 
danger of relapse. 

The prophylaxis of heat-stroke is most important. Suitable 
clothes, open at the neck, a pith helmet, and sun goggles are 
all important. An ample supply of cold drinking water should 
always be available, and should \je taken freely to countera<‘t 
the loss of fluid due to sweating. Alcohol should l)e avoided 
until sunset, and the midday meal should be small. 


LEAD-POISONING 

Lead may be absorl)ed through the lungs or through the 
alimentary tract, ilesearch into occupational lead-poisoning 
and experimental evidence point to the fact that the inhalation 
of dust containing lead is a far more potent cause of poison- 
ing than absorption through the digestive* tract. iSpecially 
dangerous occupations are those in which the workers are 
subjected to fumes from molten learl, or where th(*y are exposed 
to the inhalation of air laden with dusty lea<l compounds (e.gr., 
lead carbonate or lead oxide). Occupations such os white-lead 
manufacture, smelting of metals, accumulator- manufacturing, 
and ship-breaking show the highest incidence of lead-poisoning. 
Apart ffom such occujiational risks, occasionally cases arise from 



LEAD-POISONING 


255 


the continued ingestion of a soft drinking water that has stood 
in lead pipes or cisterns. 

As with all other poisons, there is considerable variation 
in susceptibility. Certain factors predispose to the disease. 
Perhaps the chief of these is chronic alcoholism, while renal 
disease, gout, anaemia, and acute infections all render persons 
exposed to lead absorption specially liable to develop poisoning. 
After infections, exposure to lead should be avoided for at least 
a month. Women are rather more susceptible than men, and 
the young more susceptible than the mature. 

Lead is mainly excreted into the colon and may be found 
in the faeces, whether the metal is swallowed or inhaled. To a 
less extent excretion takes place through the kidneys. 

Acute Lead-poisonino. — This usually results from the 
swallowing of a large quantity of a soluble lead salt such as 
the acetate. There is a burning taste in the mouth and acute 
abdominal pain, accompanied by vomiting and diarrhoea. The 
blood pressure falls, and signs of collapse develop. Death may 
occur within a few days, but frequently tlie patient survives 
and shows symptoms of chronic lead-poisoning. 

If seen within a few hours of swallowing the poison, the 
stomach should be washed out with dilute hydrogen sulphide 
water shghtly acidulated with sulphuric acid, as this tends 
to render the lead less soluble. Sodium or magnesium sulphate 
should be given in ^-oz. doses in order to aid elimination from 
the bowel. 

Chronic Lead-poisoning. — Early diagnosis is of the 
greatest importance. Among the early symptoms of plumbism 
are the following, any of which, should they occur in a person 
exposed to lead, must arouse suspicion : — 

1. ATiivmia , — The conjunctiv® may not appear obviously 
an®mic, and the haemoglobin may be but little below normal. 
The pallor is of an ashen hue, and it has been suggested that 
this is due to the action of lead on the akin capillaries. 

An®mia of varying degree is common in lead-poisoning. 
The hemoglobin percentage is 70 or below, and the colour- 
index is low. Basophil granules are seen in many of the red 
cells, a condition described as punctate basophilia. Although 
this is also found in other forms of anemia, it is rarely 
Been to such a striking extent as in cases of lead-poisoning. 
Its occurrence in a lead worker, even in the absence of 
other signs, is a valuable indication that lead absorption is 
occurring. 

2. J5/t^ Line. — In the presence of oral sepsis the well- 
known “ blue line ’’ appears near the gum margin. On careful 



256 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

examination with a lens the line is seen to consist of a large 
number of discrete granules of dark colour deposited deeply 
in the tissues. It is usually less than 1 mm. in width, and is 
specially obvious where oral sepsis is most marked. It does 
not occur at the exact point where the gum is adherent to 
the teeth, but is separated slightly from the gum margin. 
Care must be taken to differentiate the bluish coloration seen 
in pyorrhoea alveolaris from the blue line of plumbism. This 
is due to the formation of lead sulphide in the gums. It is 
produced by the action of sulphuretted hydrogen, derived 
from decomposition processes in the debris of protein food 
around septic teeth, on circulating lead. No blue line is seen 
if the mouth is edentulous and care of the teeth reduces the 
liability to its occurrence. It must, however, be clearly 
understood that a blue line is nothing more than an index of 
recent lead absorption and is not in itself evidence of lead 
poisoning. A somewhat similar “ blue line ” also occurs 
following the taking of bismuth, and is sometimes seen when 
this metal is used in the treatment of sypliilis. 

3. Loss of Weight, — ^This is due to a loss of subcutaneous 
fat, and to a less extent to wasting of the muscles. 

4. Abdominal Symptoms, — ^Apart from lead cohe, vague 
gastric symptoms, anorexia and particularly constipation are 
common in all stages of plumbism. 

5. Early Mental Changes, — Mental lethargy and drowsiness 
are not uncommon in the early stages of lead-poisoning. In 
other cases the patient is restive and irritable. He may com- 
plain of slight headache and of extreme fatigue. 

6. “ Rheumatic Symptoms, — Vague pains in the muscles 
and around the joints, which are usually described as chronic 
rheumatism or lumbago, occasionally occur. 

7. Neurological Symptoms, — A fine tremor of the out- 
stretched fingers, sometimes with formication and numbness, 
may occur early. It is often possible by careful examination 
to detect some sfight weakness of the extensor muscles, 
especially of the ring and little fingers, many months before 
the typical wrist-drop appears. 

S5mptoms such as those described above may. persist 
for long periods without producing serious disability. At 
any time, however, such patients are hable to display additional 
and more serious symptoms, the so-called “ Toxic episodes.” 
These are cofic, palsy, encephalopathy, and ocular disturbances. 
Of these cofic and palsy are by far the most common, colic 
occurring in practically every case and palsy in about 10 per 
cent, of oases. 



LEAD-POiSONlNG 25? 

1. Lead Colic. — The patient complains of severe abdominal 
pain, which is usually referred to the lower abdomen. Obstinate 
constipation and anorexia are also present. During the attacks 
of colic the pulse is slow and the temperature subnormal ; 
firm pressure on the abdomen tends to relieve rather than 
to increase the pain. There is no rigidity, but sometimes 
firm tumours consisting of contracted intestine may be felt. 
Occasionally, difficulty may arise in differentiating the case 
from acute abdominal conditions. 

2. Lead Palsy and Encephalopathy. — These are described 
elsewhere {vide p. 953). 

3. Ocular Disturbances. — Toxic amblyopia with temporary 
blindness, but without obvious retinal changes, may occur. 
Peripheral neuritis involving the oculo -motor nerves may 
produce diplopia. 

4. Sequelce. — Some doubt has recently been expressed, par- 
ticularly by American workers, concerning the time-honoured 
statement that chronic lead-poisoning produces arteriosclerosis 
and chronic nephritis. Much of the evidence on this point is 
contradictory, but the excellent work of Nye in Australia 
{vide p. 729) has shown beyond any doubt that, in children at 
any rate, chronic lead-poisoning may lead to severe renal 
damage of the diffuse vascular sclerotic type. In women, 
plumbism often produces abortion, while in males there may 
be sterility. 

Differential Diagnosis. — As a rule the occupation of the 
patient will suggest the diagnosis, but it must be remembered 
that abdominal symptoms in lead workers are not necessarily 
due to lead-poisoning. 

Prophylaxis and Treatment. — Industrial lead-poisoning is 
notifiable in Great Britain to the Home Office. Its incidence 
has fallen as the result of preventive measures from 1,058 
notified cases in 1900 to 96 in 1938. It is therefore at the 
present time a relatively rare disease. 

The methods adopted for the prevention of lead-poisoning 
fall under three main headings : {a) the avoidance of the 

ingestion of lead by the mouth ; (6) adequate ventilation 

of workshops ; (c) periodical medical examination of lead 

workers. The first of these can be attained by adequate 
provision of lavatory accommodation and dining-rooms for 
workers. The second is unfortunately a more difficult problem ; 
in many occupations lead fumes and dusty lead compounds 
are inevitable, but the provision of local exhaust fans or the 
use of respirators may help to diminish their inhalation. 
As regards periodical medical examination, all lead workers 



258 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

should be examined at least once a month ; special attention 
must be directed to the detection of loss of weight, constipation, 
a blue line on the gums, anorexia, anaemia, and weakness of 
the extensor muscles of the upper limbs. 

When lead-poisoning has developed, the first essential 
in treatment is the removal of the patient from the work in 
which the disease has been contracted. In mild cases this is 
sufficient. In all cases of fully developed poisoning a permanent 
change of occupation becomes necessary, as otherwise, relapse 
is certain to occur. Attention must be paid to the general 
hygiene of the patient, particularly as regards open air and 
sunshine, and the condition of the teeth and gums. Constipation 
is almost invariable, and is best treated by full doses of 
magnesium or sodium sulphate. 

It has been shown that following lead absorption the metal 
is for the most part stored in the bones, and during the active 
stages of lead-poisoning an attempt should be made to prevent 
the mobilisation of the poison from such storage. This may 
be effected by giving 3 pints of milk daily together with a 
vegetarian diet. Only after all acute symptoms have passed 
off should a cautious attempt be made to promote the elimina- 
tion of lead. Potassium iodide may be given in small doses, 
not more than 5 gr. thrice daily at the beginning of treatment, 
as occasionally it appears to produce a temporary aggravation 
of symptoms. A far more effective method is to prescribe a 
calcium free diet and further to assist elimination by producing 
an acidosis by giving ammonium chloride (15 gr. eight times 
daily). This de-leading treatment should be continued for 
three weeks. 

In cases of colic, hot applications to the abdomen give some 
relief, and the patient may be given an inhalation of amyl 
nitrite or ^ J 77 gr. of atropine hypodermically. The administra- 
tion of calcium gluconate is even more effective. In severe cases 
15 c.c. of a 20 per cent, solution may be given by slow intra- 
venous injection. This usually rapidly eases the acute pain. 
The constipation must be relieved, and for this purpose enemata 
are often required. For lead palsy the wrists should be kept at 
rest on splints in a position of dorsiflexion, and massage and 
electrical treatment should be employed. In cases of encephalo- 
pathy, sedatives are often necessary, such as bromides and 
chloral, and calcium gluconate may be given intravenously ; 
in comatose patients, or those with convulsions, venesections 
or lumbar puncture are occasionally beneficial. For the ansemia 
the most useful measures are fresh air, plenty of fresh fruit and 
green vegetables, together with the administration of iron. 



POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 


269 


ARSENICAL POISONING 

Arsenic was for long one of the most popular poisons em- 
ployed by murderers, but at the present time it is in disrepute 
owing to the ease with which it can be recovered from the body 
of the victim, even long after death. Arsenical poisoning still 
occasionally occurs as an occupational disease, and as the drug 
is often employed as a poison for vermin and insects, accidental 
poisoning is sometimes encountered. Epidemics of poisoning 
have occurred from contamination of food by arsenic ; perhaps 
the best known instance of this was that due to beer made with 
contaminated glucose, which occurred in Manchester in 1891. 
Strict regulations limiting the amount of arsenic in foods and 
beverages have completely abolished poisoning from this cause. 

Acute Arsenical Poisoning. — ^Th emost prominent symptoms 
are intense abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and collapse, and death 
may occur within a few hours. The stomach must be washed 
out and a solution of ferric hydrate introduced. Intravenous 
saline and morphia may be necessary. 

Chronic Arsenical Poisoning. — This results from long- 
continued small doses of arsenic. The two most characteristic 
features are peripheral neuritis and changes in the skin. The 
neuritis, like that produced by alcohol, affects the legs rather 
than the arms ; sensory symptoms are more prominent in 
arsenical neuritis, and numbness and pain in the legs are 
commoner than in alcohohsm. 

There is a brown pigmentation of the skin, which is specially 
marked in the flexures. The soles and palms show great 
thickening of the epidermis and appear dry and scaly, a 
condition known as hyperkeratosis. UnUke Addison’s disease, 
arsenic does not produce pigmentation in the mouth. 

Anaemia of a secondary type occurs in severe cases and 
there may be anorexia, gastric disturbances, and a tendency to 
attacks of diarrhoea. 

The diagnosis in patients who are known to be taking 
arsenic is usually easy. Confirmation is obtained by the 
discovery of arsenic in the urine, faeces, or hair. There is no 
specific treatment. Naturally the absorption of arsenic must 
be stopped and elimination promoted by keeping the bowels 
freely open. 

The inhalation of arseniuretted hydrogen (arsine) produces 
haemoglobinuria, anaemia, and haemolytic jaundice which may 
prove rapidly fatal. 

Poisoning by Salvarsan and Allied Arsenical Compounds is 

described elsewhere (vide p. 169). 



260 


POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 


MERCURIAL POISONING 

Mercurial poisoning is rare as an occupational disease, 
and in its acute form mainly occurs in attempted suicide. 
Medicinal treatment with mercury may lead to symptoms of 
poisoning. 

Acute Mercurial Poisoning. — Rapid onset of abdominal 
pain and vomiting is followed by a hsemorrhagic diarrhoea. 
There is a metallic taste in the mouth, with profuse sahva- 
tion. The kidneys are affected early, and anuria or uraemia 
supervenes. 

Immediate treatment consists in washing out the stomach 
and the introduction of the whites of four eggs in a pint of milk, 
with a view to the formation of an insoluble mercury albuminate. 
Collapse is treated by warmth and stimulants, but when the 
pain is acute, morphia is required. 

Chronic Mercurial Poisoning. — Pallor, loss of weight, head- 
aches and indigestion are early symptoms of mercurial absorp- 
tion. The most characteristic features of chronic poisoning are 
stomatitis and gingivitis with excessive sahvation, albuminuria 
and muscular tremors. The diagnosis can be confirmed by 
the finding of mercury in the urine. 

Treatment consists in preventing the absorption of further 
mercury and promoting ehmination through the bowels with 
saline purgatives. 


CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING 

Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning may result from the 
inhalation of coal gas or the exhaust of petrol engines. While 
usually suicidal in origin, accidental poisoning is not uncommon. 
The poisonous effects of carbon monoxide are duo partly to 
a specific toxic effect on the tissues, partly to anoxaemia, as 
the gas forms a stable combination with haemoglobin, known 
as carboxy -haemoglobin, thereby paralysing the action of 
haemoglobin as an oxygen-carrier. 

If the concentration of carbon monoxide in the inspired air 
is J to 1 per cent., death may occur within a few minutes. 
With high concentrations the patient rapidly becomes comatose 
and convulsed. Owing to the formation of carboxy -haemo- 
globin the blood, skin, and mucous membranes are cherry-red 
in colour. Sometimes the patient may die suddenly of heart 
failure, particularly if the gassed patient exerts himself. 



FOOD POISONING 


261 


Prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide in low concentra- 
tions may produce chronic poisoning, and the patient may 
have fainting attacks, loss of power on exertion, headache, 
nausea, palpitation, or neuritis. 

Prophylaxis and Treatment. — Canaries are extremely 
susceptible to very small amounts of the gas. When gas is 
suspected, as in mine shafts or caves, a canary is taken down, 
and so long as it remains unaffected the atmosphere may be 
regarded as safe. 

In the treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning it is 
important to give oxygen to which 7 per cent, of carbon dioxide 
has been added. The latter stimulates the respiratory system 
and produces increased pulmonary ventilation. In severe cases 
an oxygen tent should be used. If the patient has ceased to 
breathe, immediate artificial respiration must be performed. 
This should be continued for at least three hours before giving 
the case up as hopeless. The tongue should be held forward 
and a free airway ensured. Venesection followed by blood 
transfusion may increase the oxygen-carrying power of the 
blood. 


FOOD POISONING 

A considerable proportion of the diseases to which man is 
subject are the result of eating infected or poisonous food, 
and were the term food poisoning taken in its widest sense it 
would include many maladies such as cholera, typhoid, dysentery, 
and some forms of tuberculosis. Food poisoning, however, has 
come to be used in a more restricted sense, and includes only 
certain types of gastro-intestinal infections and the results of 
ingesting poisonous substances such as certain fungi. Formerly 
the term ptomaine poisoning was used synonjunously with 
food poisoning, owing to the idea that the symptoms produced 
by contaminated food were due to ptomaines, organic bodies 
resulting from the breakdown of protein. Ptomaine poisoning 
as a medical term is going out of use, as it is now realised 
that the decomposition products of food contaminated by 
non -pathogenic organisms are seldom injurious to man. 

Food poisoning may be classified into two main groups of 
cases : (1) poisoning due to chemical bodies, as, for example, 
in certain fungi and fruits ; (2) infection of food by certain 
pathogenic organisms, which may produce toxins in the food 
before it is eaten, or may multiply within the body. 

Food poisoning of the first group is relatively imcommon 
and usually results from eating poisonous fungi in mistake for 



262 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

mushrooms. Soon after ingestion of the j^isonous 
vomiting, diarrhoea and collapse occur. The hver is often 
affected; and a condition resembling acute hepatic necrosis 
supervenes with a fatal result {vide p. 462). j i. xu 

Far more important, however, is food poisoning due to the 
infection of food by pathogenic organisms, particularly B. 
(ETtvyche, B, CTiteritidis of Gaertner, and B, dyseutevicB Souue, 
Contamination of food depends on a number of factors. 
One of the most important of these is the climate. In hot 
countries food poisoning is notoriously common owing to the 
fact that micro-organisms can multiply rapidly, and also 
because the food is more liable to become infected by flies. 
Lack of care in the preparation and storage of food will increase 
the danger of food poisoning, as wiU also the length of time 
during which food is kept before consumption. Food poisoning 
is often supposed to be associated with the use of canned food, 
particularly meat and fish. With modem methods of sterilisa- 
tion in the canning industry the risk is negligible. 

Food Infection by the Bacillus Dysenterise Sonne. B. 
dysenterice Sonne is frequently the cause of localised outbreaks 
of diarrhoea and vomiting in adults and of summer diarrhoea in 
children. 


The clinical course varies greatly : in the majority diarrhoea 
and vomiting are associated with moderate fever of some 
twenty-four to forty-eight hours’ duration. Others have 
milder symptoms for some weeks. In infants and children, 
collapse and prostration may be severe, and death — ^very 
occasionally sudden — ^take place. A simple fluid diet with rest 
in bed is usually aU that is required. The organism quickly 
dies out in the majority of cases. Personal hygiene is essential 
to prevent the spread of infection and in institutional epidemics 
search should be made for a carrier. 


Food Infection by the Gaertner Bacillus and Allied Organisms. 

— The symptoms vary considerably in severity, ranging firom 
a mild attack of vomiting and diarrhoea to a condition of 
profound and sometimes fatal collapse. The virulence of the 
organism, the amount of contaminated food eaten, and the 
reaction of the individual are all important factors in deter- 
mining the course of the illness. 

The onset of symptoms is usually within a few hours of the 
ingestion of the i^eoted material. The earliest to appear are 
dizziness and abdominal pain of a colicky character ; nausea 
and vomiting occur early, and later there is diarrhoea with the 
passage of watery stools. In mild oases, when the infected food 
has been got rid of by vomiting or diarrhoea, the patient rapidly 



FOOD POISONING 263 

recovers. In severe cases, however, there are grave constitu- 
tional symptoms. After a few hours there is some degree of 
pyrexia, and the repeated vomiting and diarrhoea produce a 
condition of tissue dehydration which may resemble cholera. 
As in the latter disease, the stools are rice-water in type, with 
no faecal material ; rarely blood and mucus may be passed, 
suggesting bacillary dysentery. The facies becomes pinched 
and the eyes sunken ; severe cramps, as in cholera, occur in 
the calves ; the urinary flow is diminished owing to dehydration, 
and eventually the patient may die of cardiac failure. Needless 
to say, all gr^es of severity occur between the very mild and 
very severe choleraic forms of the disease. 

A diagnosis of food poisoning should not be made without 
a careful physical examination to exclude appendicitis and other 
abdominal conditions. Frequently the occurrence of symptoms 
among a number of people who have partaken of the same food 
will give a clue to the diagnosis, but it must be remembered 
that individuals vary greatly in their susceptibility to food 
poisoning, and therefore not every one who has eaten infected 
food need necessarily show symptoms. Those who have 
previously suffered from dysentery or colitis are specially 
susceptible. 

The treatment wiU vary with the severity of the illness. 
Confinement to bed is advisable during the acute stage. In 
mild cases caator oil (J to 1 oz.) should be given together with 
25 minims of tincture of opium. Kaolin (| to 1 oz.) is often 
of great value. A hot-water bottle on the abdomen usually 
relieves the colic. Nothing should be given by mouth except 
water or albumen water with a little glucose. In severe cases 
with dehydration and collapse, purgatives may be dangerous. 
The first essential is to restore the fluid content of the body, 
and this may be done by rectal salines. If the latter cannot 
be retained, intravenous saline may be necessary. In severe 
oases convalescence is slow and the patient may develop a 
chronic gastritis, which may need careful dietetic treatment 
for many months. In mild oases, when the acute symptoms 
disappear, rapid return to a normal diet is possible. 

Botulism. — This exceedingly rare disease is due to the 
toxins of Clostridium botvlinum, an anaerobic spore-forming 
l)acillus contaminating tinned food. The symptoms resemble 
those of an encephalitis rather than food-poisoning. The 
prominent features are diplopia, ptosis and failure of accom- 
modation, progressive muscular weakness, constipation and 
respiratory failure. 

Treatment, usually ineffective, consists in immediate 



264 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

administration of antitoxic serum (obtainable from the Ministry 
of Health), some form of respirator apparatus and small doses 
of morphine. 

Food Idiosyncrasies. — Hypersensitiveness to the protein in 
certain kinds of food is not uncommon. Such articles of food 
as shell fish, milk, eggs, and strawberries may in certain 
individuals produce urticarial rashes and sometimes attacks 
of diarrhoea and vomiting. The specific nature of the reaction 
may be proved by cutaneous reaction tests with proteins 
derived fi’om various articles of food. In some cases asthma 
may be due to sensitisation to food proteins. As a rule the 
patient discovers for himself the food which produces symptoms 
and avoids it. Sometimes it is possible to desensitise by the 
injection of repeated small amounts of the proteins concerned. 


BROMIDE AND BARBITURATE POISONING 

Bromide Intoxication. — Bromides, if taken in large amounts 
over a long period, may be retained in the body and produce 
symptoms, such as confiision, disorientation, haUucinations and 
delusions. The reflexes are sluggish and there may be tremor 
and ataxia. The patient may even become stuporose. The 
well-known bromide rash, resembling acne, is not commonly 
seen in these cases. If it is not known that the patient has 
been taking large amounts of bromide, the symptoms may be 
mistaken for other toxic states such as chronic alcoholism. 
The diagnosis can be confirmed by finding an excess of bromide 
in the blood. If this is above 100 mg. per 100 c.(\ the 
B 3 rmptoms are likely to be due to bromide. Rarely, owing to 
an idiosyncrasy to bromides, even small doses may produce 
symptoms of bromide intoxication. 

Treatment , — Bromide should be withdrawn and the patient 
made to take large amounts of fluid. Elimination of bromide 
is effected by giving sodium chloride. This is best taken in 
cachets or pills containing 10 gr. at two-hourly intervals. 

Barbiturate Poisoning.— These drugs include veronal, dial, 
nembutal, and luminal. Overdosage may produce drowsiness, 
ataxia, tremor, and stupor and the patient is very liable to 
die of hypostatic pneumonia. In cases of acute poisoning 
stomach and colon lavage may be beneficial, and strychnine 
and atropine should be given in full doses. Picrotoxin should 
be given intravenously in a 1 in 1000 solution at the rate of 
1 c.c. per minute. It has a stimulating effect on the cerebral 
cortex and the medulla. The drug is stopped when twitching 



ALCOHOLISM 265 

of muscles occurs or when the comeal and pupillary reflexes 
return. Picrotoxin is dangerous in opium poisoning. Repeated 
lumbar pimcture with drainage of the theca is of value. 

ALCOHOLISM 

The problem of alcoholism has always been one of the 
greatest difficulties which beset the way of both social reformer 
and doctor, and no attempt can be made here to discuss the 
wider aspects of the problem. Without doubt the ultimate 
solution will lie not in prohibition but in an improvement in 
social and economic conditions. 

Alcoholism may be classed as acute and chronic. The 
first is sufficiently common to need no description. It is most 
important not to make a diagnosis of alcoholism in a comatose 
patient until other possibilities have been excluded. The smell 
of alcohol in the breath is of no diagnostic value, as sudden 
illness of all varieties is often treated by giving the patient 
brandy or other forms of alcohol. In case of doubt observation 
for a few hours will usually settle the diagnosis. Intramuscular 
coramine often hastens the return of consciousness in alcoholic 
coma. It is well to remember that hypoglycasmia {vide p. 312) 
may exactly simulate some of the stages of acute alcoholism. 

A medical man may at any time be called upon to decide 
on the question as to whether a person is under the influence of 
drink while in charge of a car. Special attention should be 
paid to the following points : (i) Test the memory for recent 
and past events, noting any abnormal emotional reactions and 
defects of speech, (ii) Test co-ordination in walking or standing 
with feet together, also ability to pick up an object, such as a 
coin, (iii) Obtain a specimen of handwriting, being careful to 
provide a good light and satisfactory material for writing, 
(iv) Take the pulse. This is usually rapid and full, but allowance 
must be made for nervous factors, (v) Examine the pupfls. 
These are usually dilated and react somewhat sluggishly, 
(vi) Smell the breath, bearing in mind that a smell of alcohol 
is not in itself evidence of alcoholism. Under the Road Traffic 
Act of 1930 it is an offence to be ‘‘ xmder the influence of drink 
or a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of having proper 
control of the vehicle.” In view of the fact that the examining 
doctor may have to stand a rigorous cross-examination in court 
he should be specially careful to make a thorough ph3rsical 
examination, making notes of his findings. Estimation of the 
alcohol content of the blood may be of value in doubtful cases. 
If this exceeds 2*4 parts per 1,000 it oau almost certainly be 



266 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

assumed that the person was under the influence of alcohol 
in a legal sense. Lower concentrations, however, do not 
prove sobriety. 

Chronic alcoholism is a more serious proposition, producing 
as it does widespread changes both in the viscera and nervous 
system and in the intellectual capacity of the patient. The 
organic changes which may be brought about by the continued 
use of alcohol include chronic gastritis, cirrhosis of the liver, 
arteriosclerosis and disease of the myocardium, chronic 
nephritis, and peripheral neuritis. Such lesions are not 
necessarily present in every case of chronic alcoholic poisoning, 
and for further details reference must be made to the sections 
on the diseases of the various systems concerned. 

There are many factors in the setiology of alcoholism. 
Heredity is certainly one, but, as has already been pointed 
out, direct inheritance of an alcoholic tendency is less common 
than might be imagined. Often the causes are occupational, 
as for instance in the case of bar-tenders, certain commercial 
travellers, or those employed in hot and dusty industries. 
The social surroundings also have a considerable effect on 
the individual ; sordid housing, monotonous work, domestic 
unhappiness, all tend to be factors in the production of 
chronic alcoholism. Most important of all, however, is a 
psychopathic tendency in the individual, who finds alcohol 
a ready means of escape from the difficulties and problems 
which face the ordinary man. 

A large number of different alcoholic psychoses have 
been described, in some of which probably alcohol is but 
an incident rather than a cause, but there are four fairly weU- 
defined conditions which need separate description. These are 
chronic alcoholism, delirium tremens, Korsakow’s syndrome, 
and dipsomania. 

Chronic Alcoholism. — In the more severe grades of chronic 
alcoholism the patient does not get drunk in the ordinary 
sense of the term, and he is often able to stand doses of alcohol 
which would produce manifest alcoholic symptoms in a normal 
person. The long-continued abuse of alcohol, however, pro- 
duces a typical clinical picture. Irritability and a progressive 
deterioration in intellect and character become apparent, 
especially in the domestic circle ; among friends and strangers 
the chronic alcoholic may be tolerable enough, but in the bosom 
of his family he is quite prepared to make the life of those 
around him a misery by his callous disregard for the welfare 
of anyone except himself, his irritability, and sometimes even 
his violence. In his business or profession the quality of his 



ALCOHOLISM 


267 


work deteriorates ; he is careless and unpunctual, and lacks 
the mental concentration necessary to complete an imcongenial 
task. Often only under the stimulus of alcohol is he aHe to 
carry on a normal life. Depression may alternate with excite- 
ment, and suicide is not uncommon. He has but little insight 
into his condition, and strongly resents any suggestion that 
his failings are due to alcohol ; he is suspicious, ready to see 
afeonts and to pick quarrels. Sometimes there may be a 
paranoid reaction and delusions of persecution may arise. He 
is persistently untruthful, and promises to reform are invariably 
broken. Occasionally chronic alcoholism is encountered in 
persons who, at first sight, appear to be above suspicion. This 
is specially true of women at about the menopause, who may 
indulge in secret drinking. 

Physically, many alcoholics are obese and plethoric, except 
in the later stages, when there may be marked loss of flesh. 
There is a coarse tremor of the hands, and tremor of the 
tongue and lips may render articulation difficult. Appetite 
is impaired and morning anorexia is often complete. The 
cardiac failure sometimes seen in alcoholics, especially in 
heavy beer drinkers, is probably due to lack of vitamin B 
{vide p. 547). 

Delirium Tremens. — This well-defined condition may arise 
in chronic alcoholics as the residt of a debauch, or in inter- 
current infections, such as pneumonia ; fractures or sudden 
withdrawal of alcohol may also produce delirium tremens. 
The symptoms and treatment are described on page 1027. 

Korsakow^s Ssmdrome. — This term is applied to cases in 
which there is a peripheral neuritis associated with a mental 
condition in which memory for recent events is lost, with 
marked disorientation (vicJc p, 1029). 

Dipsomania. — This condition is really a series of attacks of 
acute alcoholism, which tend to recur at more or less fixed 
intervals. Between the attacks the patient may be apparently 
a perfectly normal individual and is often then a total abstainer, 
but with each attack comes an uncontrollable craving for 
alcohol, which must be satisfied at all costs. The condition is 
often hereditary and tends to develop in middle life. In 
character the attacks are probably allied to the manic-depressive 
type of insanity and the ultimate prognosis is bad. 

Treatment ol Chronic Alcoholism. — Before attempting treat- 
ment it is necessary to investigate the circumstances under 
which the condition has originated. If these are occupational, 
no attempt must be made to return to the work in which 
temptation occurred. Every effort must be made to gain the 



268 POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 

patient's confidence, and this is best achieved by regarding him 
not as a criminal but as the victim of a disease. In severe or 
longstanding oases institutional treatment is a necessity, as 
otherwise it is impossible to ensure the patient giving up 
alcohol. At the beginning of treatment decreasing amounts of 
alcohol are allowed, until at the end of a fortnight the allowance 
has been cut down to nothing. After this, complete abstinence 
must be insisted on for the remainder of life. As alcoholism 
is so frequently psychological in origin, an attempt must be 
made to secure a readjustment of the patient's surroundings 
and general regime. No drug has any specific action, but in 
the early stages of the withdrawal of alcohol, bromides and 
chloral may be necessary to secure sleep. 

The outlook in chronic alcoholism is usually poor, particu- 
laurly when the alcoholism is but one symptom of an inherent 
mental instability. Even after prolonged institutional treatment 
relapse is frequent when the temptations and difficulties of 
normal life are again encountered. 


MORPHINISM 

Morphinism is less common than alcoholism, and produces 
less effect upon the general health. The drug, however, 
is more deleterious than alcohol in its effects on intellect 
and character. The compounds most generally employed 
are tincture of opium, heroin and morphine. Of recent 
years the Dangerous Drugs Act has increased the difficulty 
of obtaining the drugs, but unfortunately the addicts of 
morphinism will go to any lengths to obtain a supply, and 
usually succeed in doing so. 

Drug addiction, especially where the opium group is 
concerned, is seldom found except in individuals with a psycho- 
pathic inheritance, and it is doubtful whether there is ever any 
serious risk of the habit developing in a j^erson with a normally 
stable nervous system. More often an exaggerated horror of 
drugs leads to the withholding of morphia and other sedatives, 
in spite of indications for their administration. 

In chronic poisoning by opium and its derivatives, physical 
health is often well maintain^ even when very large doses are 
being taken. As an example of this, a medical student was 
foimd to be taking 8 gr. of morphine daily and yet was able 
not only to carry on with his studies but also took an active 
part in athletics, such as boxing and football. 

Perhaps the most significant change in character brought 



MORPHINISM 269 

about by morphinism is the complete disregard of all conven- 
tional moral qualities, such as honesty and truthfulness. A 
morphia addict will without a qualm rob his best fnend and, 
if discovered, feels no sense of shame. When under the 
influence of the drug the patient is often amiable and may 
appear normal, but as its effects wear off, he becomes restless 
and irritable until relieved by the next dose. With complete 
withdrawal, delirium with hallucinations may occur. With 
long-continued use the dose needs to be progressively increased. 
Ultimately the general health may suffer, but the morphia 
habit is often consistent with a long life. This is especially 
true of the use of opium, which in many countries such as 
India is taken regularly by a large proportion of the population 
apparently without serious effects either on body or mind. 

On physical examination the most obvious sign is myosis of 
the pupils ; the reflexes are often diminished, and paraesthesiae 
and hyperaesthetic areas are present. As the result of an over- 
dose of morphia the patient lapses into coma, with a marked 
slowing of the respiration rate. 

The irmimmi of well-established morphinism is most difficult, 
partly because the patients are usually the subjects of an 
inherent nervous instability. Relapse even after apparent 
cure is extremely common, and continued abstention from the 
drug is usually attained only by a difficulty in obtaining it. 
The prognosis is, therefore, specially bad among doctors and 
nurses, who can seldom resist the opportunities which fall in 
their way. The only satisfactory method of dealing with 
morphia addicts is strict confinement in an institution, where 
they can be prevented from obtaining access to the drug. Great 
care must be taken to ensure that the patient does not 
secrete a supply of the drug on his person before he enters 
the institution. 

Sudden and complete withdrawal of the drug may produce 
dangerous collapse, especially in elderly and debilitated persons. 
It is best withdrawn gradually over a period of about fourteen 
days. For the restlessness and distress produced by abstention 
large doses of bromide, chloral, or luminal may be required. 
The bowels should be kept freely open to aid in elimination 
of the drug. In dealing with elderly addicts, who have been 
taking the drug for years, attempts to withdraw the drug are 
more likely to shorten the patient’s life than to lengthen it. 

The j)ermanenoe of cure depends mainly upon the patient 
being enabled to live a sheltered life. With exposure to 
financial, business, or domestic worries, or to physical or 
nervous strain, there is a grave risk of a return to drug-taking. 



270 


POISONINGS AND INTOXICATIONS 


COCAINISM 

Cocaine may be taken hypodennioally, by mouth, or in the 
form of snuff, but the last method is that most frequently 
employed. 

It has already been stated that morphinism seldom develops, 
apart from some psychopathic tendency. This is even more 
true of the cocaine habit, which is often started deliberately. 
Cocaine addicts, owing to the expense of the habit, are nearly 
all drawn from among the wealthy classes, but it may occur 
among the large number of agents who are engaged in the 
illegal distribution of cocaine. Anorexia is perhaps the most 
marked symptom. The cocaine addict can practically dispense 
with food altogether. Unlike morphia, cocaine is a stimulant, 
which produces a temporary sense of well-being and mental 
activity, but as the effects of the drug wear off there is depression 
and irritability imtil a further dose is taken. Morally there is 
rapid deterioration, and the unfortunate addict soon comes 
completely under the control of those who supply him with the 
drug, to obtain a supply of which he is ready to stop at nothing. 
Suicide is not uncommon, or death may occur from an accidental 
overdose. The emotional state varies between exaltation and 
dejection ; vivid and terrible nocturnal hallucinations are 
common. The pupils are dilated and the eyes have a sparkling 
appearance while under the influence of the drug. 

As regards treatment, the first essential is that the confidence 
of the patient should be obtained, as without his co-operation 
it is almost impossible to prevent him obtaining the drug. 
A complete breach in the patient’s relationship with other 
addicts and with the illegal traffickers in the drug is essential. 

Unlike morphia, cocaine may be completely withdrawn at 
once, but the patient must be under close personal 8U})ervision, 
either in an institution or at home. If the craving for the 
drug becomes intense it may be relieved by giving hyoscine, 
preferably by mouth. The general health should be attended 
to by keeping the bowels freely open with salines and by 
exercise with plenty of open air. 


J. J. CONYBKABE. 



DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE 

SYSTEM 


THYROID GLAND 


P HYSIOLOGY. — The thyroid gland is capable of utilising 
inorganic iodine supplied to it by the blood-stream. This 
iodine combines with tyrosin in the epithelial cells of the 
gland to form di-iodo -tyrosin, some of which is converted to 
thyroxin. These two substances may then be built up into 
the protein compound iodo-thyro-globulin for storage in the 
lumen of the thyroid vesicle as “ colloid.” The true hojmone of 
the gland is probably a peptide containing both di-iodo -tyrosin 
and thyroxin and is supplied constantly to the blood-stream 
from the thyroid cell, at a rate which is controlled by the 
thyrotrophic hormone of the pituitary. Excessive stimulation 
of the gland by this hormone leads to acceleration of this rate 
as the result of increased activity of the thyroid cells, which 
grow in size and may multiply in number at the expense of 
the colloid, which practically disappears. This is the histo- 
logical picture found in Graves’ disease. On the other hand, 
diminished stimulation of the gland by the thyrotrophic hormone 
leads to slower hormone production with a tendency to colloid 
storage and gives rise to the histological picture of the resting 
gland ; large colloid vesicles bounded by flattened epithelial 
cells. 

Blood Ste^m. Thyroid Cell. Colloid. 

Inorganic 

Iodine 

Thyroid ^ 

Hormone 


' Di-iudo-tyrosin 


^ Th3Toxin 



Iodo-thyro-globulin. 


Another factor which exerts an important influence on 
the histological picture is the amount of iodine supplied to the 
gland. In districts where there is deficiency of iodine in the 
water, simple colloid goitre is endemic. In response to this 

271 



272 DISORDERS OP THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

lack of iodine the colloid stores are first depleted and then 
there is an overgrowth of the active glandular tissue to try to 
keep pace with the demand for thyroid hormone. When from 
time to time relatively increased supplies of iodine become 
available they are immediately stored with consequent accumula- 
lation of colloid and the formation of a colloid goitre. It has 
recently been shown that thiourea and thiouracil can prevent 
the utilisation of the inorganic iodine of the blood. If either 
of these substances is administered in a case of Graves’ disease 
tliere will be a consequent (and quantitative) decrease in the 
amount of thyroid hormone secreted mto the blood-stream, 
but though the symptoms of the disease may abate there will 
be no diminution in the over-activity of the thyroid cells which 
is due to a thyro trophic stimulus. Indeed the glandular hyper- 
trophy may be accelerated on account of the diminished 
quantities of iodine being utilised. 

Finally, in hypothyroidism, the glandular tissue is deficient 
in amount or in its responsiveness to the thyrotrophic stimulus, 
with consequent diminution in the supply of the hormone 
to the blood-stream. Quantitative deficiency is congenital and 
leads to cretinism. Diminished responsiveness or actual cellular 
degeneration leading to myxcedema may take place at any age, 
though it most commonly follows such periods of physiological 
over-activity as pregnancy and the menopause and represents a 
condition of exhaustion atrophy. Histologically the gland may 
be largely replaced by fibrous tissue and it may even be difficult 
to identify the structure of the cells and vesicles. 


GOITRE 


(Colloid, Endemic, Nodular, or Adenomatous Goitre) 

Goitre is endemic in mountainous districts and in areas 
far removed from the sea, such as Derbyshire, the Alps, the 
Himalayas, and around the Great Lakes in America. In these 
regions there is a deficiency of iodine in the water. Goitre 
may also occur sporadically in jjlaces where it is not endemic. 
Women are much more commonly affected than men. The 
swelling frequently develops from the normal physiological en- 
largement of the gland which occurs at such times as puberty 
and during pregnancy. 

The degree of enlargement is very variable, and though 
it may be considerable and unsightly it seldom produces 
symptoms. Dyspnoea and compression of the trachea, how- 
ever, may accompany a very large thyroid or a retrosternal 



THYROTOXICOSIS 273 

goitre. A gland so situated may give rise to severe pressure 
symptoms. 

The gland itself may be enlarged as the result of a generalised 
increase in the colloid substance in the alveoli, or there may 
be localised adenomatous enlargements in which cysts may 
develop. The condition is then termed cystic adenoma. 
Adenomatous enlargement of the thyroid may ultimately lead 
to symptoms of hyperthyroidism. 

Treatment. — In endemic areas prophylaxis has proved most 
effective. Sodium iodide is given for a fortnight twice a year 
to all children. Each course consists of about 30 gr. For 
therapeutic purposes the dose should not exceed 5 gr. daily. 
Definite localised adenomata are much better treated by 
operative removal. Many adolescent goitres represent physio- 
logical enlargement of the gland and tend to disappear without 
treatment. 

Carcinoma. — ^This condition is fortunately rare. It may 
occur spontaneously in a normal thyroid in middle age, or 
perhaps more commonly a carcinoma develops in an adeno- 
matous goitre which has been present for many years. Sur- 
rounding parts are rapidly invaded, leading to fixation of the 
gland, and there is enlargement of the adjacent lymph glands, 
with secondary deposits especially in bones. The only effective 
treatment is early surgical excision. 

Thyroiditis. — Acute inflammation of the thyroid may pro- 
duce an abscess, which requires drainage. Chronic inflammatory 
changes may also occur, known as Riedel's thyroiditis or 
“ woody ’’ thyroid. In this condition the thyroid is enlarged, 
hard and often tender, and there is a great increase in fibrous 
tissue. Involvement of the recurrent laryngeal nerves may 
produce paralysis of a vocal cord and there is often pain on 
swallowing and referred pains in the chest and neck. The 
nature of the inflammatory process is unknown and the 
condition is sometimes progressive in spite of thyroidectomy. 


THYROTOXICOSIS 

{Exophthalmic Goitre, Graves' Disease, Hyperthyroidism, 
Toxic Adenoma) 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^The histological picture is one of general 
h 3 rperplasia of the gland. The alveoli are variable in size, 
and there is little colloid to be seen. The alveolar cells are 
columnar and are arranged irregularly in multiple layers with 
the formation of papillary ingrowths in place of the single layer 

i8 



274 DISORDERS OP THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

of cuboidal cells which lines the normally secreting alveolus. 
The amount of fibrous tissue increa43es as the condition becomes 
chronic. Lymphocytic infiltration is a prominent feature. In 
some cases the gland may show single or multiple adenomata 
in various stages of development or degeneration. 

Enlai^ement of the thymus at autopsy is seen in about half 
the cases. Evidence of myocardial degeneration is rare even 
in patients dying of cardiac insufficiency. 

iEtiology. — Thyrotoxicosis is frequently preceded by 
emotional strain. It occurs more frequently in women than 
in men. It presents a variety of clinical pictures depending 
on the age and previous make-up of the patient, picking out 
and emphasising the weaknesses of the patient’s constitutional 
diathesis. It is probably due to increased secretion of thyro- 
trophic hormone by the pituitary. 

Symptoms. — In early adult life the onset of thyrotoxicosis 
may be sudden, but not infrequently in patients of middle age 
and over the onset is insidious, and such cases are liable to 
be misdiagnosed as heart disease or neurasthenia. As the 
symptoms and signs vary considerably in every case, they are 
best considered separately. 

1. Thyroid Gland , — The enlargement of the thyroid is very 
variable in extent, and the severity of the disease by no means 
coincides with the degree of glandular enlargement. Occasion- 
ally, indeed, there may be no obvious enlargement clinically, 
although the gland on section may show characteristic hyper- 
plasia. The blood supply is much increased, and a systolic 
or continuous murmur, often very loud, may be heard over 
the gland ; in severe cases a thrill may also be felt. The 
enlargement usually involves both lobes and the isthmus, and 
the gland forms an obvious tumour in the neck, wliich can be 
seen to move on swallowing. In the earlier stages of the disease 
the thyroid is of normal consistency, but later on it may 
become unduly firm from an increase in fibrous tissue. This 
is often the case after treatment with iodine. 

When thyrotoxicosis develops in a patient with an old- 
standing goitre, the gland is usually hard and nodular, but 
sometimes symptoms may arise when there is nothing beyond 
a very small and localised adenoma. 

2. Heart , — Tachycardia is one of the earliest and most 
constant findings in thjnrotoxicosis. The rate may range 
from 90 to 160 beats per minute, and under the influence of 
any excitement or emotion there is a rapid acceleration. The 
pulse pressure is frequently increased. The heart is at first 
of normal size and the rhythm regular, but when tachycardia 



THYROTOXICOSIS 


276 


has persisted for a long period, dilatation, myocardial in- 
sufficiency, and eventually auricular fibrillation may develop. 
Cardiac symptoms are particularly prominent in patients of 
over middle age. 

3. Exophthalmos. — ^Although not invariably, there is some 
protrusion of the eyes in the great majority of cases, especially 
those below thirty years of age. The exophthalmos often 
occurs early, and may persist long after the di^ase has become 
quiescent. Even minor degrees of the condition are readily 
noticeable, and during the acute phases of the disease there 
is a characteristic staring appearance. Rarely conjunctivitis 
and comeal ulceration may result from inability to close the 
eyes. The classical signs of exophthalmos, such as a lagging 
of the upper eyehd on looking downwards (Von Graefe’s sign) 
and a spasm or retraction of the upper lid with inability to 
bUnk (SteUwag’s sign), are of little help in diagnosis as they 
are not present until exophthalmos is obvious. Occasionally 
the exophthalmos is unilateral. 

4. Loss of Weight . — ^In the more acute cases there is often 
a rapid loss of weight but in the more chronic forms of the 
disease this is not necessarily a striking feature. 

6. Muscular Fatigue . — Muscular fatigue may be profoimd 
and in some cases of severe thyrotoxicosis the skeletal muscles 
are so atrophied and weak that the condition closely resembles 
progressive muscular atrophy. After thyroidectomy the muscles 
regenerate. 

6. Nervous Symptoms. — ^Mental instability is always a 
marked feature, especially in younger patients. The patient is 
restless even when in bed, irritable, and very prone to be upset 
by small annoyances. Depression is common and weeping 
occurs without obvious cause. In severe cases the restlessness 
may amount to mania emd delirium, and these symptoms are of 
grave significance. Tremor of the ^gers is a constant feature, 
and is best seen when the hands are outstretched and the fingers 
separated. U nlik e that of alcohohsm, the tremor is fine in 
character and interferes but little with voluntary movements. 

7. Oastro-intestinal Symptoms . — These are absent except 
during the exacerbations or “ crises ” of the disease. Gastro- 
intestinal crises, as they are termed, consist of vomiting and 
diarrhoea which may be both severe and intractable, and 
often herald death. 

There is evidence that there is some degree of impairment 
of liver function in thyrotoxicosis ; this can be demonstrated 
by the liver function tests. 

8. Skin. — This is warm and moist and the patient often 



276 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

complains of feeling hot. Patients with thyrotoxioosis always 
prefer cold to hot weather. The hair may fall out and the 
skin is sometimes pigmented. 

9. Oenerative Organs , — ^The menses may be scanty, irregular, 
or absent. During pregnancy sjonptoms are sometimes 
temporarily improved, but relapse is apt to occur after 
parturition. 

10. Urine , — There is a lowering of sugar tolerance and 
glycosuria may result. 

Basal Metabolic Bate (B.MLB.)* — Estimations of the B.M.R. 

are of great value both in diagnosis and as a guide to progress 
under treatment. In this procedure the rate of absorption 
of oxygen is estimated and is expressed as a percentage of 
the amount which would be used by a normal person, taking 
into consideration the factors of sex, age, height, and weight. 
In severe hyperthyroidism the B.M.R. may be as much as 170 
per cent, of the normal. Such a figure is expressed by the 
term +70. 

Course ol Thsrrotozicosis. — ^In untreated cases, especially 
in the yoimger group of patients, exacerbations tend to alternate 
with periods of comparative quiescence. In older patients, 
especially those with auricular fibrillation, the course of the 
disease may progress steadily downwards and in the absence 
of treatment the patient dies of congestive cardiac failure. 

A small proportion of relatively mild cases may recover 
completely within twelve months, but as a rule the disease, 
unless dealt with surgically, persists for many years, unless 
death results from intercurrent infection, heart failure, or 
exhaustion in a crisis of thyrotoxicosis. 

Differential Diagnosis. — ^Very often a diagnosis of thyro- 
toxicosis is obvious at first glance. This is particularly true 
of the acute type. On the other hand, it is sometimes very 
difficult to decide whether a patient is suffering from thyro- 
toxicosis or an anxiety state. In the latter the pulse may be 
rapid, especially when the patient is first seen, but as a rule 
it falls to a normal figure when the patient is at rest. With 
the tachycardia of anxiety and excitement sinus arrhythmia 
is usually well marked, whereas in thyrotoxicosis sinus 
arrhythmia cannot be detected clinicaUy. Patients suffering 
from anxiety states may exhibit emotional instability not unlike 
that of thyrotoxicosis. 

Occasionally tuberculosis may be suspected in cases of 
thyrotoxicosis, where tachycardia and loss of weight are the 
chief features, but as a rule enlargement of the thyroid or other 
features help to elucidate the condition. 



THYROTOXICOSIS 277 

When oardiao symptoms, such as palpitation, dyspnoea, and 
especially auricular fibrillation are prominent features, it is 
easy to overlook their thyroid origin. Many oases of hyper- 
thyroidism occur after middle age in patients with adenomata 
of the thyroid, in which exophthalmos is absent and the 
symptoms are primarily oardiao. It is therefore moat important 
ahoaya to make a careful examination of the thyroid in every 
patient who devdopa obacure cardiac aymptoma. 

Treatment. — ^The results of thyroidectomy are so good 
that in well-established cases of thyrotoxicosis prolonged 
medical treatment is rarely advisable. In mild cases, however, 
the patient may be kept under observation for some months. 
Medical treatment in a hospital ward is undesirable, as these 
patients readily acquire intercurrent infections. In addition 
the association with disease and death has a bad effect. 
Sedatives such as phenobarbitone gr. noct. maneq.) diminiati 
restlessness. Avoidance of domestic worries is important. 

Treatment with Iodine . — ^The value of iodine in exophthalmic 
goitre has been thoroughly substantiated. It reduces the 
B.M.R. to a lower though not to normal figure and the 
symptoms of hyperthyroidism become less striking. Iodine 
medication is mainly useful as a pre-operative measure. If the 
drug is administered over a prolonged period the initial 
improvement disappears. Moreover, iodine appears to produce 
its maximum effect only at its first administration, and a 
further course of iodine after an interval is of less benefit. 
It is, therefore, usually inadvisable to employ iodine therapy 
indiscriminately in patients who are likely eventually to 
require operation. It should, however, be given for from ten 
to fourteen days before operation even in mild cases. 

The value of iodine, therefore, lies in the fact that it produces 
a temporary improvement or remission of symptoms, during 
which the patient may safely be submitted to thyroidectomy. 
It is specially valuable during the “ crises ” of the disease, 
in which it rapidly allays the restlessness and excitability, and 
stops the diaurhoea and vomiting. Thus iodine can render 
operable many cases that without its use would be too ill to 
justify operation. As a result of iodine treatment the mortality 
of thyroidectomy has fallen to less than 1 per cent. 

Iodine is bwt given by mouth in the form of Lugol’s 
solution (iodine 5 per cent., potassium iodide 10 per cent.). 
The initiid dose should be about 5 minims of Lugol’s solution 
thrice daily, and this is rapidly increased to a total of 30 or 
even of 45 minimn per diem for some days before operation. 
The temporary exacerbation of hyperth3rroidi8m which often 



278 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

occurs immediately after operation should be combated by 
large doses of iodine, up to 100 minims in the first twenty-four 
hours. As the patient improves iodine is withdrawn and may 
be omitted completely within a week to ten days. If vomiting 
prevents absorption of iodine by mouth it may be given rectally, 
or in desperate cases by the mtravenous drip injection of 
sodium io^de (7-5 gr. in a litre of normal saline). 

Radium or Deep X-ray Treatment — ^This is only advisable 
when for any reason, such as an associated tuberculous infec- 
tion, operation is contraindicated. 

Operative Treatment — The essentials for success are as 
follows : (i) A skilful surgeon who has had ample experience 
of thyroid surgery ; (ii) adequate pre-operative treatment with 
iodine ; (iii) skilful anaesthesia, preferably a basal anaesthetic, 
followed by gas and oxygen. 

Thyroidectomy is contraindicated in patients whose 
symptoms are due to an anxiety state, even if there is evidence 
of some degree of thyrotoxicosis in addition, ats the results 
m such caises are often very disappointing. Nor is it wise 
to press for operative treatment if the patient is opposed to 
the idea. 

It must be realised, however, that even the most successful 
operation does not cure the patient forthwith, though there is 
often a striking and rapid improvement. A varying period 
of rest and quietude is necessary, and occasionally a further 
operation may be required. 

When hyperthyroidism occurs in a patient with an 
adenomatous goitre- — so-called toxic adenomai — operation should 
be performed at the earliest possible moment. Even with a 
decompensated heart and auricular fibrillation results are 
often good, and without operation the patient usually dies of 
cardiac failure. After operation the heart appears to have 
remarkable recuperative powers. When fibrillation is present 
digitalis should be given to slow the ventricular rate. Following 
thyroidectomy the fibrillation often disappears spontaneously. 
If this does not occur quinidine should be tried provided there 
has been no evidence of congestive cardiac failure {vide p. 621). 

Thionracil. — ^It has recently been reported that this sub- 
stance and other compoimds of sulphur and urea inhibit the 
utilisation of iodine by the gland and thus prevent it from 
delivering excessive amotmts of its active principle into the 
blood'Stream. The effect appears to be quantitative and by 
carefully adjusting the dosage it seems to be possible to regulate 
the degree of thyrotoxicosis. The treatment should be carefully 
controlled by frequent estimations of the B.M.R., and as this 



MYXCEDEMA 279 

falls to normal the initial dose should be reduced. Thiouracil 
does not affect the excessive thyrotrophic stimulation, however, 
and the gland may actually increase further in size and will 
continue to exhibit the histological picture of over-activity. 
Overdosage may be dangerous and agranulocytosis has been 
reported. It is too early to say, at the moment of writing, 
what part this new form of therapy will play in the management 
of cases of thyrotoxicosis. 


Myxcbdbma 

Myxoedema is a chronic disease of adults resulting from 
deficiency of thyroid secretion, characterised by a low basal 
metabolism, increase of weight, thickening of the skin, and 
mental disturbance. 

The disorder is more common in women than in men and 
occurs most frequently after the age of forty. Its onset is 
usually insidious, and has been attributed to either functional 
exhaustion of the gland as the result of long-continued stimula- 
tion or to the actual replacement of the gland by fibrous tissue. 
Sometimes myxoedema occurs in the late stages of exophthalmic 
goitre, or it may follow a partial th 3 rroidectomy if too much of 
the thyroid has been removed. 

Symptoms. — In myxoedema most of the symptoms are the 
reverse of those found in hyperthyroidism. 

1. Thyroid Oland. — This is either normal in size, or it 
may be so shrunken as to be completely impalpable. 

2. Heart . — ^The pulse is slow but the blood pressure is often 
raised, and arteriosclerosis may be present. 

3. Weight. — There is a marked gain in weight, often 
amounting to over a stone in a few months. This is due partly 
to the low rate of basal metabolism, partly to the thickening 
of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. 

4. Nervoiis System . — ^Patients with myxoedema become 
slow both in physical movements and cerebration. They lose 
their memory and suffer from apathy and somnolence. Special 
senses are often blunted, especially hearing. 

6. The Skin. — ^The changes which occur in the skin and 
subcutaneous tissues give the myxcedematous patient a 
characteristic expressionless appearance. A general thickening 
and infiltration of these tissues occur all over the body ; this 
differs from ordinary oedema in that there is no pitting on 
pressure. The facial appearance alters and the finer featu^ 
become obliterated, so that eventually all patients with 



280 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 


myxoedeiua show a remarkable resemblance to one another. 
The skin is dry and scaly, and the nails become brittle and 
atrophic. The hair is coarse and often falls out. This occurs 
not only on the scalp but all over the body. Loss of hair on 
the outer sides of the eyebrows is characteristic. 

6. Temperature , — ^The temperature is subnormal and may 
fall as low as 93° P. ; myxoedematous patients are particularly 
sensitive to cold and feel very much better in hot weather. 

7. Alimentary System , — The appetite is usually poor 
and constipation is common. Sometimes abdominal dis- 
tension as a result of deficient peristalsis in the intestines is 
troublesome. 

8. Basal Metabolic Rate , — ^This is always low and may be 
reduced to 30 or 40 per cent, below normal. As a result of 
treatment with thyroid extract the rate rises to normal, and 
at the same time the body temperature increases. 

9. Blood Cholesterol , — ^The normal figure is about 180 
mg. per 100 c.c. and in myxoedema the figure is usually over 
250 mg. 

The disease if left untreated is steadily, if slowly, progressive, 
and death occurs from exhaustion or intercurrent ii^ection. 
Its duration extends over many years. At autopsy the thyroid 
is found to be much diminished in weight, as the resxdt of 
atrophy of the glandular epithelium or its replacement by 
fibrous tissue. The skin shows atrophy of the sebaceous glands 
and a general thickening due to fibrils of connective tissue 
rather than infiltration with fluid. 

Apart from the fully developed condition of myxoedema 
described above, minor degrees frequently occur in which the 
patient becomes listless and apathetic, without the development 
of the characteristic changes in the skin. These forms of the 
disease, known as hypothyroidism rather than myxoedema, 
probably result mainly from prolonged over-stimulation and 
consequent exhaustion of the thyroid. It is important, however, 
to refrain from diagnosmg hypothyroidism simply on a history 
of recent gain in weight. 

Treatment. — Fortunately we have in thyroid extract a 
specific remedy, which is nearly always effective. It is given 
by mouth as tablets of a dried extract of thyroid (Thyroideum 
B.P.) in doses of J to 4 gr. The initial dose is ^ gr. twice or 
three times a day, and this must be cautiously increased until 
the symptoms of myxoedema are relieved. It is seldom that 
more than 3 gr. a day are necessary. Useful guides as to the 
quantity required are the temperature and the pulse-rate. 
Overdosage may cause palpitation and tachycardia. When 



PARATHYROID GLANDS 281 

the correct dosage has been found it must be continued 
indefinitely if relapse is to be avoided. 

Cbbtikism. — ^This condition is one of hypothyroidism, 
occurring in infancy. It is specially common in regions where 
goitre is endemic, and is due to a failure of the th 3 Toid to 
develop during foetal life. 

At birth the infant may appear normal, but within a year 
it becomes obvious that its progress, both as regards growth 
and intelligence, is delayed. Growth, particularly of the 
extremities, remains stunted, and an adult cretin may retain 
the stature of a child. The skin is rough and dry, the nostrils 
wide, and the nose sunken. The abdomen is distended, an 
umbilical hernia is often present, and constipation is marked. 
The development of the intellectual faculties is always delayed 
and usually remains permanently below normal. 

Treatment is by the admii^tration of thyroid extract. 
Its effects, especially if started early in life, may be remarkably 
satisfactory. The dosage varies considerably in individual 
oases, but is usually about 2 gr. of the dry extract daily. This 
must be continued throughout life, which is not necessarily 
curtailed by the disease. 


PARATHYROID GLANDS 

The parathyroid glands are four minute bodies embedded 
in the tissue of the thyroid. Removal produces tetany, which 
is characterised by increased excitability of the motor nerves 
with tremors and muscular spasm. The parathyroids may 
be removed or damaged as a result of partial thyroidectomy, 
and in such cases tetany may occur shortly after the operation. 

The function of the parathyroids is the production of a 
hormone which regulates calcium metabolism. In normal 
human blood the serum calcium is 10 mg. per 100 c.c. ; in 
tetany, due to parathyroid deficiency, the serum calcium 
may fall as low as 6 mg. per 100 c.c. ; administration of 
the active principle of the parath 3 rroid raises the calcium in 
the blood ; prolonged administration mobilises calcium from the 
bones and thereby increases the amount of calcium in the blood. 

Generalised Osteitis Fibrosa. — ^This is a relatively rare 
disease occurring in early adult life due to adenoma of the 
parathyroid gland. The blood calcium is high — often up to 
16 mg. — and the calcium in the urine is increased. The bones 
become partially decalcified and cystic. Ultimately spon- 
taneous fractures occur and the patient becomes bedridden. In 



282 DISORDERS OP THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

about 30 per cent, of cases renal ^Iculi form, probably owing 
to the increased excretion of calcium in the urine. The only 
effective treatment is removal of the parath^oid adenoma. 
Unfortunately this is often very small and diflScult to find, 
even on exploration. Following operation the patient may 
suffer from tetany. 


Tetany 

The clinical manifestations of tetany, though characteristic 
of parathyroid deficiency, occur frequently in other conditions. 
Tetany is common in infants, particularly in association with 
rickets and gastro-intestinal disorders {vide p. 240). In adults 
typical attacks of tetany due to alkalosis very occasionally 
occur in pyloric obstruction {vide p. 410). Similar attacks 
result from pulmonary hyperventilation and are sometimes 
described as “ spontaneous overbreathing tetany.” The 
hyperpnoea is hysterical. Tetany may also occur during 
pregnancy or lactation. As has alre^y been mentioned, 
tetany may follow operations on the thyroid. 

Symptoms. — ^The most prominent s3rmptomB of tetany are 
the muscular cramps, which affect particularly the extremities. 
The attacks of cramp last for a variable time, from a few 
minutes to several hours, and are usually painful. The hands 
and forearms are most commonly affected, and during a spasm 
assume a characteristic position. The fingers are flexed at 
the metacarpo-phalangeal and extended at the interphalangeal 
joints ; the thumb is adducted into the palm, and the fingers 
are drawn closely together, thus producing what has b^n 
termed the main d’accoucheur.” The wrists and elbows 
are flexed and the arms adducted. When the condition affects 
the feet a rather similar position is produced. In severe cases 
there may be generalised epileptiform convulsions. 

Between the attacks there is evidence of hyperexcitability 
of the motor nerves. An attack of tetany may be initiated by 
pressure around the arm, such as that produced by a tourniquet 
(Trousseau’s sign). That the spasm produced is dependent 
on reflex action rather than local anaemia is proved by the fact 
that both hands are affected simultaneously. Similarly, 
tapping the facial nerve close to its point of exit from the 
stylo-mastoid foramen provokes a spasm of the facial muscles. 
Thi& is known as Chvostek’s sign. In infants, laryngospasm 
is common, particularly in cases of rickets {vide p. 242). 

Course and Prognoi^. — The duration and severity of tetany 
depend mainly on its cause. In infants the condition usually 



ADRENAL GLAND 283 

improves quickly, and is rarely fatal. After thyroidectomy 
the attacks of tetany may last for many months, but gradually 
become less severe, possibly owing to regeneration of para- 
thyroid cells. 

Treatment. — ^Infantile tetany is dealt with elsewhere {pide 
p. 243). For tetany in adults, particularly that following 
operations on the thjroid, parathormone is valuable. This 
preparation is standardised physiologically in units and must 
be given hypodermically. The dosage should be controlled 
by estimations of the serum calcium, which must not be allowed 
to rise much above the normal 10 mg. per 100 c.c. In adults 
the initial dose required is about 30 units twice a day and 
later this may be reduced to 30 units daily. After some 
weeks or months the symptoms of tetany may pass off even 
though the serum calcium remains subnormal. Tlik is probably 
due to the nervous system having become accommodated to 
the altered state of the blood. Tetany can also be controlled 
to some extent by administration of calcium, which may be 
given by mouth as calcium lactate in 10-gr. doses at two-hourly 
intervals, or as intramuscular injections of calcium gluconate. 
A milk diet with abundant lactose also helps to prevent tetany. 
With a meat diet, symptoms are usually aggravated. 


ADRENAL GLAND 

Physiology. — ^The adrenal gland consists of two parts — 
cortex and medulla — separate, both in development and 
function. The medulla is derived embryologically from the 
same cells as those which form the sympathetic nervous system, 
while the cortex is mesodermal in origin. The cortex plays 
a part in the regulation of the metabolism of sodium and 
chlorine, and is in some way associated with the differentiation 
of sex and the development of secondary sexual characteristics. 
The medulla secretes adrenalin which is discharged into the 
blood-stream. This has a specific stimulating effect on 
sympathetic nerve endings, and its presence in the blood leads 
to vaso-oonstriction, a rise of blood pressure, dilatation of the 
bronchioles and a conversion of glycogen in the liver into 
glucose. Though the action of adrenalin is very transient it 
may produce dangerous effects if a large dose is injected rapidly. 
It is inadvisable to give more than 5 minims of 1 in 1000 
solution without waiting to observe its effect. 

Experimental removal of the adrenals or their destruction 
by disease produces a maurked loss of tone in the vascular 



284 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

system and asthenia, which ultimately results in death. The 
adrenals become exhausted during acute infections and also 
in severe traumatic injuries and extensive bums. 


Addison’s Disease 

In 1855 Addison published a paper entitled “ On the 
Constitutional and Local Effects of Disease of the Suprarenal 
Capsules,” in which he described as foUows the characteristic 
features of the disease which has come to bear his name : 
“ Anfiemia, general languor and debility, remarkable feebleness 
of the heart’s action, irritability of the stomach, and a peculiar 
change of colour in the skin.” 

Symptoms. — ^The cardinal symptoms of Addison’s disease 
are a marked and progressive asthenia, a low blood pressure, 
and pigmentation of the skin and buccal mucous membranes. 
The severity of the symptoms fluctuates, and at times there are 
exacerbations or “ crises ” during which the blood pressure 
falls, vomiting is severe, and collapse is alarming. Death usually 
supervenes in the absence of effective treatment. 

1. Asthenia. — Languor, debihty, and loss of muscular power 
are the symptoms which first indicate the onset of the disease. 
Appetite is lost and the patient is indisposed to undertake work, 
either physical or mental. 

2. Blood Pressure . — Both the systolic and diastolic readings 
are low, and the former rarely exceeds 100 mm. of mercury 
when the disease is first diagnosed. In the later stages there is 
a steady fall in blood pressure. 

3. Pigmentatiori . — ^This symptom occasionally appears early, 
and may be the first sign of the disease. Rarely, it is com- 
pletely absent throughout, but usually the pigmentation 
becomes more marked as the disease progresses. There is a 
generalised discoloration of the skin, especially marked in the 
flexures and the naturally pigmented areas of the body. The 
colour varies from a light brown to black, and the pigment is 
distributed as small spots or larger areas. In the mouth 
irregular patches of pigmentation appear on the mucous 
membrane of the lips and cheeks, upon the gums, or the 
palate. 

In addition to the symptoms detailed above, vomiting is 
extremely common, particularly in the later stages of the 
disease, where it is probably due to the profoimd circulatory 
disturbance. Attacks of vertigo and syncope are frequent, 
and presumably due to a similar cause. The blood-count is 



ADDISON’S DISEASE 286 

usually normal though sometimes there may be a mild hypo- 
ohromic anaemia. 

In the absence of treatment a fatal issue is usually not 
long delayed once the typical symptoms have developed. 
Occasionally it is the result of an intercurrent infection, 
but more often it occurs suddenly. Rarely life is prolonged 
for several years. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The characteristic picture of Addison’s 
disease is produced by two pathological conditions only, either 
bilateral destruction of the glands by a fibro-caseous tuberculous 
process, or more rarely by an atrophy of the glands, which 
is sometimes so extreme that no trace of suprarenal can be 
discovered at autopsy. Active tuberculosis elsewhere is 
imusual. 

Diagnosis. — As with all diseases as rare as Addison’s disease, 
the diagnosis is not infrequently proved to be wrong. Pig- 
mentation, asthenia, and low blood pressure may be the most 
prominent features in cachectic states due to carcinoma, 
anorexia nervosa, and Simmonds* disease. Pigmentation of 
the buccal mucosa is, however, absent in these conditions. 
The possibility of pigmentation as the result of descent from 
non-European ancestors must be borne in mind. 

Treatment. — An important feature of the condition is a 
diminution of the serum sodium figure and, to a less extent, 
of the blood chlorides. The blood potassium may be raised, 
particularly during a relapse. Oral administration of sodium 
chloride (about 200 gr. daily) is therefore beneficial in main- 
taining health in the intervals between crises. This treatment 
should be continued throughout the patient’s life. In view of 
the hypoglycaemia which is often found in Addison’s disease, 
the patient should take plenty of glucose. 

During the crises of Addison’s disease it is necessary to give 
intravenous glucose saline to restore the serum ionic values 
and the loss of fluid. Cortical extract should be given in daily 
doses of 20 to 100 c.c. in the saline. 

Recently a synthetic product known as desoxycorticos- 
terone acetate has been prepared. This substance is marketed 
as an oily suspension for intramuscular injection under the 
names of Percorten and Doca and has been shown to exert a 
very striking beneficial effect in Addison’s disease. The usual 
daily dose is 6 mg., though larger doses are indicated in 
periods of crisis. Subcutaneous implantation of this hormone 
(usually 4 pellets of 100 mg. each) produces a prolonged 
constant effect and in conjunction with sodium chloride may 
maintain the patient in good health for many months. 



286 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 


Tumoxtbs of the Adrenal Qlands 
Medullary tumours are rare and arise either from the 
chromaffin cells (phseochromocytoma) or firom the sympathetic 
ganglion cells (neuroblastoma). The former give rise to 
paroxysmal or continuous hypei^nsion. The latter occur only 
in children and are highly malignant. Cortical tumours give 
rise to the adreno-genital syndrome of which the chief feature 
is masculinisation which differs in severity according to the 
age at which the tumour appears. It occurs during foetal 
life only in females and leads to pseudo-hermaphroditism. 
Before puberty the condition is most marked in boys, in whom 
the genitalia develop adult proportions, usually with precocious 
sexual desire. There is excessive growth of hair, especially 
on the face, axillae and pubis, and there may be excessive 
muscular development — the so-called infant Hercules type. 

In adults the condition is confined to women who show 
varying degrees of virilism from min or degrees of hypertrichosis 
to a condition closely resembling Cushing’s syndrome (see p. 291 ) 
with localised obesity, aunenorrhoea, masculinisation of the 
external genitalia, and hypertension. The aidreno-genitad 
syndrome may be due to simple hyperplasia of the deepest 
layer of the cortex, the androgenic zone, or to a cortical 
adenoma in which malignant changes may subsequently 
occur. It is associated with increased excretion in the urine of 
androgenic substances, measured as IT-keto-steroids. 

Treatment of an established tumour, especially when there 
is evidence of malignancy, is surgical and consists in the removal 
of the affected adrenal. Assistance may be obtained by in- 
travenous pyelography in determining in which gland the 
growth is situated by defining the position of the kidney, which 
may be displaced downwards if the tumour is large. 

In the milder forms of adrenal virilism characterised only 
by hirsuties and, possibly, raised blood pressure, so serious a 
course as surgical interference is unwarranted. In such cases 
a tumour is seldom present. Unfortunately hormone therapy 
has so far proved ineffective, and there is no alternative to 
local remedies for removal of the excessive and unsightly growth 
of hair. 

THYMUS GLAND 

Little is known of the physiology of the thymus. Experi* 
mental extirpation of the gland has not given constant results. 
The gland enl^es until puberty, and after that time becomes 
smaller, until in late middle life practically none of it remains. 



THE MENOPAUSE 


287 


The thymus is foimd to be enlarged in certain diseases, 
notably exophthahnio goitre, acromegaly, and myasthenia 
gravis, but perhaps the commonest condition in which thymic 
hyperplasia is found is atatua lymphaticus. This term is em- 
ployed to describe a condition sometimes found at autopsy in 
persons who have died suddenly without apparent cause, most 
often during an anaesthetic. In such cases the thymus is 
often considerably enlarged, and there is also some general 
increase in the lymphoid tissue throughout the body. Status 
lymphaticua is unlikely to be diagnosed during life. When 
death occurs, it results from sudden cessation of the heart beat 
rather than from respiratory failure. 

In infants an enlarged thymus may give rise to paroxysms 
of dyspnoea, which have been termed thymic asthma. There 
may be marked stridor and cyanosis, which occasionally result 
in death. 


THE MENOPAUSE 

Apart from their functions in the production of spermatozoa 
and ova, the reproductive organs play an important part in 
the development of secondary sexual characteristics, and a 
consideration of their secretions chiefly concerns the endo- 
crinologist and the gynaecologist, but from the point of view 
of a medical textbook there is only one condition which calls 
for notice, namely, the group of symptoms associated with the 
cessation of menstruation and ovarian hypofunction, known as 
the menopatise. 

Although the menopause is a normal physiological process, 
which usually occurs between the ages of forty-five and fifty- 
five, it is often associated with so many and so diverse symptoms 
that it almost merits the name of a disease. Indeed, it is 
perhaps the commonest condition which the medical man is 
called upon to treat in women of middle age. Similar symptoms 
may occur in earlier life as the result of an artificial menopause. 

Every practitioner should be familiar with the symptoms of 
the menopause, more especially as in many cases he will be able 
to add greatly to the patient’s comfort during this difficult period. 

In many women menstruation continues regularly up to 
the time of the menopause and then ceases suddenly, without 
producing any disturbance, either local or general. Unfor- 
tunately, however, there is often a period, sometimes prolonged 
over several years, during which menstruation may be mark^y 
irregular, and during which the patient is in constant suffering, 
both physical and mental. 



288 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

The most oharacteristio symptom of the menopause is the 
oocurrenoe of what are termed “ hot flushes.” Suddenly and 
for no apparent reason a sensation of great heat is experienced 
all over the body, the skin becomes flushed, and profuse 
sweating may occur. The functions of practically every 
system in the body may become deranged, though there is no 
manifestation of organic disease. Tachycardia, palpitation 
and feelings of oppression in the chest, pain in the back or 
in the limbs, arthritis, headache, vertigo, disturbances of 
appetite and digestion are all common accompaniments of the 
menopause. Perhaps most important of all are the nervous 
symptoms. The patient is irritable and readily upset by trifles, 
and makes life a burden not only to herself but to all aroimd 
her. Obsessions and delusions may occur, and the character 
and whole outlook may change. Recourse may be had to drugs, 
alcoholic or religious excess, and sometimes the mental condi- 
tion may be such that certification is necessary. 

Treatment. — ^Treatment consists in sympathy, reassurance, 
and administration of oestrogenic substances. These may be 
given in the form of hormone extracts obtained jfrom pregnancy 
urine (oestrone) or as the synthetic product stilboestrol. The 
latter is both cheap and highly effective by oral administration, 
which, however, produces in about 20 per cent, of cases mild and 
usually transient toxic symptoms, such as nausea and headache. 
If these symptoms persist, oestrone should be substituted 
despite its extra cost. Daily dosage varies according to the 
severity of the symptoms, from 3,000 to 10,000 international 
units of oestrone or 0-25 to 1*0 mg. of stilboestrol. The aim 
should be to determine as quickly as possible the minimal 
effective dose and then to decrease rather than to increase it. 

It is important to remember that organic disease is prone 
to develop about the age at which the menopause occurs, 
and no case should be lightly dismissed with a diagnosis of 
menopause imless a thorough physical examination has been 
carried out. 


THE PITUITARY GLAND 

Physiology* — The pituitary consists of a glandular portion, 
the anterior lobe and pars intermedia, embryologically derived 
from the foregut by an upward growth from the naso-pharynx, 
known as Rathke’s pouch, and a nervous element, the posterior 
lobe, consisting of a downgrowth of neuroglial tissue from the 
diencephalon. 

The anterior lobe is composed of cells, 60 per cent, of which, 



THE PITUITARY GLAND 


289 


the chromophobe cells, contain no granules and probably 
represent the resting phase of the secreting cell. Of the re- 
mainder, the chromophil cells, three-quarters contain acid 
staining granules, the eosinophil cells, while coarse basophilic 
granules are found in the rest, the basophil cells. The chromophil 
cells secrete directly into the vascular sinuses which they 
surround. At least six endocrine activities have been ascribed 
to the anterior lobe. These are : — 

1. The growth hormone, which is secreted by the eosinophil 

cells and regulates skeletal growth. Up to the present, 
administration of pituitary extracts to stimulate or 
accelerate growth in cases of pituitary infantilism or 
other types of dwarfism has proved disappointing. 

2. The gonadotrophic factors, which control the functional 

activity of the ovary and testis. Three types of 
extract are at present available : 

Chorionic gonadotrophin derived from the placenta 
and from the urine of pregnant women. It is 
the presence in excess of this factor in pregnancy 
urine which forms the basis of the Aschheim- 
Zondek and Friedman tests for pregnancy. 
Injection of pregnancy urine extracts in the form 
of Antuitrin-S, Gonan, Physostab, Pregnyl, etc., 
induces descent in suitably selected cases of 
undescended testicle. 

Serum gonadotrophin derived from the blood serum 
of pregnant mares. This induces follicular matura- 
tion and spermatogenesis in infantile animals. 

Pituitary gonadotrophin derived from the pituitary 
glands of such animals as oxen, sheep, etc. It is 
said to contain a synergic factor which enhances 
the effect of chorionic gonadotrophin. 

3. The thyrotrophic hormone, which controls the activity of 

the thyroid gland. 

4. The lactogenic hormone, which stimulates the secretion 

of milk from the mammary glands. 

5. The corticotrophic hormone, which controls the activity 

of the adrenal cortex. 

6. The diabetogenic principle, which antagonises the effect 

of insulin, and the ketogenic principle, which facilitates 
the conversion of fats to liver glycogen with a tendency 
to the production of ketosis. 


^9 



290 DISORDERS OP THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

The pars intermedia is usually described as belonging to 
the posterior lobe. It consists of a thin strip of tissue composed 
of layers of basophil cells, similar in structure to those of the 
anterior lobe. Its secretions pass by way of the pars nervosa 
into the cerebrospinal fluid of the thiri ventricle. It is probable 
that interference with this path by lesions in the posterior 
lobe, the pituitary stalk or the overljdng hypothalamic region 
may give rise to disorders of fat, carbohydrate or water 
metabolism, leading to obesit3% lowered sugar tolerance or 
diabetes insipidus. The pars intermedia secretes two hormones. 
One of these, vasopressin, stimulates smooth muscle, producing 
constriction of the capillaries, peristalsis of the intestines, and 
contraction of the muscle surrounding the mammary ducts, 
resulting in the expression of previously secreted milk — 
galactogogue effect. It also inhibits the flow of urine. The 
other, oxytocin, stimulates uterine contractions. Commercial 
extracts of the posterior lobe such as ‘‘ pituitrin ” contain both 
the factors, which are also separatelj" available under such 
trade names as “ pitressin ” (vasopressin) and “ pitocin ” 
(oxytocin). 

Adenomata of the Pituitary 

The commonest tumour of the pituitary is an adenomatous 
proliferation of cells of the anterior lobe. Such adenomata may 
be chromophobe, eosinophil or basophil. 

1. Chromophobe Adenoma. — Since the chromophobe cells 
produce no endocrine secretion the only disturbances resulting 
from a chromophobe adenoma are due to pressure on neigh- 
bouring structures. Thus the remaining cells of the anterior 
lobe may be compressed, as indicated by the development of 
such sjTnptoms as amenorrheea or impotence. The tumour 
mav encroach upon the boundaries of the sella turcica, showing 
radiographic evidence of generalised enlargement of the pituitary 
fossa or erosion of the posterior clinoid processes. It may 
enlarge upwards and burst through the diapliragma sella? 
and involve the overlying structures. Ilms the fibres of 
the optic nerves w^hich carry impulses from the nasal halves 
of the retinae and cross in the optic chiasma may atrophy 
from pressure and lead to bitemporal hemianopia {vide p. 890). 
Signs of increased intracranial pressure may develop and an 
attempt should be made to remove the growth. Other supra- 
sellar tumours which may give rise to similar “ neighbourhood ” 
symptoms are tumours of the pituitary stalk and cysts of 
Rathke’s cleft, and tumours arising in embryonic rests of 
Rathke’s pouch, which are known as cranio-phaj^ngiomata. 



THE PITUITARY GLAND 


291 


2. Eosinophil Adenoma. — When the tumour develops before 
the epiphyses have fused there is a generalised skeletal over- 
growth with the production of gigantism. There is seldom a 
proportionate increase of muscular strength, and the pituitary 
giant is generally clumsy, feeble and readily fatigued. Develop- 
ment of the adenoma in adult life leads to the condition of 
acromegaly. The onset is usually insidious. Thickening of 
the soft tissues is as much responsible as actual changes in 
the carpal and tarsal bones and phalanges for the characteristic 
enlargement of the extremities. The fingers become clubbed 
and the hands increase in breadth, giving them a spade-like 
appearance. The gradual changes in the facial appearance 
finally render the patient unrecognisable to any lEriend who has 
not seen him since the onset of the disease. The malar bones, 
the nose, and the lower jaw become unduly prominent. The 
teeth become spaced and the lips and tongue are coarsely 
thickened. The voice becomes rough and deep owing to 
thickening of the vocal cords and enlargement of the larynx. 
There is a generalised enlargement of all the viscera — splanch- 
nomegaly. The appetite may be voracious and constipation a 
troublesome symptom. Thirst and polyuria are sometimes 
observed. Commonly there is a lowered carbohydrate tolerance 
with transient glycosuria. Usually the sexual functions are ulti- 
mately depressed with amenorrhoea and virilism in the female and 
impotence and loss of libido in the male. Should the tumour 
increase greatly in size, the pituitary fossa enlarges and 
‘ ‘ neighbourhood ’ ’ symptoms appear. Surgery may be indicated 
if these become severe. Some success has been achieved by deep 
X-ray therapy, particularly in relieving headaches and the con- 
striction of the visual fields . The disease usually runs a prolonged 
course and the symptoms are seldom incapacitating or distressing. 

Basophil Adenoma {Cushing's Syndrome ), — Unlike the 
other types of pituitary adenoma this tumour is usually small 
and intrasellar and does not give rise to pressure symptoms. 
It most commonly occurs in yoimg adults or in early middle 
age. It affects women three times as often as men. The 
83mdrome is characterised by both metabolic and endocrine 
disturbances. The appetite is ravenous and there is excessive 
thirst and polyuria. Sugar tolerance is lowered with hyper- 
glycsemia and glycosuria in some cases. Obesity of the face, 
neck, and trunk, especially of the lower abdomen, is striking 
and may develop rapidly. Abdominal stride appear, but, unlike 
those which follow pregnancy, they are purple in colour and 
do not fade. Extensive ecchymoses are to be seen on the arms 
and legs and alarming bruises result from trivial injuries. 



292 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

Fractures of the long bones occur from insufficient cause, and 
there is frequently osteoporosis of the upper thoracic vertebrse 
giving rise to kyphosis. The blood pressure is raised, often to 
very high levels, 250 systolic and 160 diastolic. The 
patient may develop any of the severe symptoms seen in 
malignant hypertension {vide p. 582), such as severe headache, 
visual disturbances due to hypertensive retinopathy (tnde 
p. 687) and attacks of cardiac asthma. The patient presents 
a plethoric appearance with polycythsemia. Men suffer from 
impotence. In women there is amenorrhoea with virilism, 
hirsuties, acneiform skin lesions and acrocyanosis. 

The syndrome may be difficult to distinguish from adrenal 
virilism, and in every case that has come to autopsy there 
has been some evidence of increased adrenal cortical activity 
and in many an adrenal tumour has been found. In some 
cases there has actually been no evidence of a pituitary adenoma, 
but in these cases, as in all the others, a characteristic hyaline 
degeneration of basophil cells has been foimd. Treatment is 
disappointing and transient in its effect. It consists in efforts 
to check the excessive activity of the basophil cells either by 
courses of deep X-ray therapy to the pituitary gland or by 
administration of large doses of oestrogens. Surgical removal of 
the gland has been attempted in a few cases, but it is an heroic 
procedure which, if successful, sometimes leads to symptoms 
of pituitary deficiency such as are seen in Simmonds^ disease. 

PirmTAKY Insufficiency 

1. Simmonds’ Disease. — ^This condition develops as the 
result of a destructive lesion of the pituitary gland, always 
involving the anterior lobe and sometimes affecting the posterior 
lobe as well. The incidence in females is about twice as great 
as in males, and the syndrome frequently follows pregnancy 
or abortion, particularly when associated with a post-partum 
haBmorrhage. It is due to loss of the stimulating influence 
of the pituitary on all the other endocrine glands, especially 
the gonads, thyroid and adrenals. The most striking symptom, 
when it is present, is extreme general emaciation (“ pituitary 
cachexia ’’). It does not necessarily occur, however, and 
proved cases have been described in which the loss of weight 
has been insignificant. The teeth and hair rapidly fall out, 
and one of the striking features of the clinical picture is the 
complete absence of a:^ary and pubic hair. There is loss of 
sex desire associated with impotence in the male and amenot- 
rhcea in the female. The basal metabolic rate is usually very 



THE PITUITARY GLAND 293 

low, readings of - 60 per cent, having been recorded. The 
temperature is subnormal and the patient is sensitive to cold. 
The skin becomes dry and wizened and loses its pigmentation. 
The blood pressure is always below normal and muscular 
weakness is usually marked. The blood sugar is low and sugar 
tolerance is increased. Constipation is the rule and attacks 
of abdominal pain and vomiting have been described. Diagnosis 
is often difficult, and the condition may be mistaken for 
Addison’s disease, myxoedema or anorexia nervosa. Though 
there may be many features of adrenal cortical failure pig- 
mentation is never present and indeed the skin is characteristi- 
cally pale. The basal metabolic rate is usually even lower than 
in the most advanced case of myxoedema, and although the 
skin is dry it never shows the typical myxoedematous deposits. 
In anorexia nervosa the patient is restless and full of energy, 
and apart from the loss of weight often in remarkably good 
health. The loss of pubic and axillary hair is a useful diagnostic 
sign in Simmonds’ disease. 

TYeatment should be attempted with every available 
anterior pituitary extract, but is usually disappointing. Desoxy- 
corticosterone acetate may elevate the blood pressure and 
alleviate to some extent the muscular weakness. Thyroid 
should be used cautiously. High doses have been known to 
precipitate attacks similar to Addisonian crises. Destructive 
lesions of the pituitary may of course occur before puberty, 
producing a clinical picture similar to Simmonds’ disease. At 
this age the condition is known as jyrogeria. The disease is 
usually but not necessarily rapidly fatal. 

2. Pituitary Infantilism. — This condition, which occurs 
during childhood, is seldom fatal, and httle opportunity has 
been afforded for examination of the pituitary after death. 
There is a general retardation of skeletal and bodily growth, 
and the patients remain dwarfed but not deformed. The sexual 
functions may also fail to develop. There is no mental retarda- 
tion, nor do the patients become obese, as is the case in FrOhlich’s 
syndrome. The facial appearance may later become pre- 
maturely old , and the skin wrinkled. Treatment with the grow th 
hormone preparations at present available is disappointing. 

Disorders related to the Pituitary and 
Hypothalamus 

There is a group of conditions usually described as being 
due to pituitary deficiency in which the lesion may lie 
anywhere on the path between the pituitary and the third 



294 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

ventricle, i.c., in the anterior or posterior pituitary, in the stalk, 
in the hypothalamus, or in the nucleus supra-opticus. The 
commonest of the diseases belonging to this group are FrOhlich’s 
Syndrome and Diabetes Insipidus. 

1. Frohlich’s Syndrome (Dystrophia Adiposo-OeniUUis ), — 
The onset of the disease commonly occurs between the ages of 
eight and ten, and is comparatively sudden, being marked by 
a rapid increase in weight which is often accompanied by 
a cessation or slowing of skeletal growth. The disease may or 
may not be due to a pituitary tumour, and X-ray evidence of an 
enlarged pituitary fossa or calcification of a cranio-pharyngioma 
may be found. In those cases which are not due to an organic 
lesion of the pituitary, spontaneous improvement may occur 
after puberty, and it is possible that they represent a com- 
parative functional failure of the pituitary at a time of life 
when normally a great strain is placed upon it. The condition 
may also appear for the first time in adult life. 

In the male child the penis is small and the testes remain 
undeveloped and may be undescended. The fat is largely 
deposited around the pelvic girdle, the upper part of the thighs, 
the lower abdomen, and the breasts, giving the patient the 
general appearance of a female rather than of a male. The 
fingers are long and tapering, in contrast to the spade-like hands 
of acromegaly. There is a marked degree of knock-knee. 
The blood-sugar tolerance curve may show a diminished rise 
in the blood-sugar level even after the ingestion of very large 
amounts of glucose, and whereas some normal persons pass 
sugar in the urine after a dose of 200 grm. of glucose, a 
patient with FrOhlich’s syndrome may be able to take 
400 grm. without the production of glycosuria. Diabetes 
insipidus is occasionally an associated condition. Often the 
subjects of the disease are intellectually bright and do well 
at school. 

The outlook in cases of FrOhlich’s syndrome will naturally 
depend on whether a tumour is present. If this is so, 
** neighbourhood ’’ symptoms may develop and require relief 
by operation. When the disease is due simply to pituitary 
hypoplasia or hypothalamic involvement the patient may live 
for years, but owing to the obesity is prone to die from 
intercurrent infections. 

As regards treatment, the available gonadotrophic prepara- 
tions are sometimes effective but must alwayis be given by 
injection; preferably twice a week, over a period of months. 
There is too frequent a tendency to attach the diagnosis of 
Prdhlich’s syndrome to fat children whose obesity is simply 



THE PITUITARY GLAND 


295 


due to over-eating and lack of exercise, and it should be borne 
in mind that the essential triad of symptoms in FrOhlich’s 
syndrome are retardation of skeletal and sexual development, 
and obesity. In any case two or three months’ dietetic restric- 
tion is an excellent prelude to any subsequent treatment. 
If a tumour of the pituitary is the cause of the symptoms, 
a radical operation or a decompression may have to be 
attempted. 

2. Diabetes Insipidus. — In this condition the main symptoms 
are polyuria, thirst, and emaciation. The amount of urine is 
enormously increased and may be as much as 20 pints in the 
twenty-four hours : it is of extremely low specific gravity and 
free from both albumen and sugar. The patient is much 
inconvenienced by frequency of micturition both by day and 
night. Sometimes the appetite is excessive, and naturally 
very large quantities of fluid have to be taken in order to 
avoid dehydration. 

Occasionally the disease has been foimd to occur in families, 
presumably as the result of a hereditary factor. It has also 
been known to follow head injuries. 

The condition may last for many years without fatal effects, 
and treatment by extract of the posterior lobe is often effective. 
Subcutaneous injections of pituitrin produce a marked diminu- 
tion in diuresis, which lasts for six to twelve hours. For 
effective treatment it is usually necessary for the patient to 
have two injections a day of ^ tol c.c. of the extract, although 
if pitressin tannate is used the effect of the injection is pro- 
longed, sometimes for as much as forty-eight hours. Administra- 
tion of adequate doses of the hormone or the tannate may 
produce unpleasant symptoms due to intense peripheral 
vasoconstriction and intestinal peristalsis. Unfortunately, 
oral administration, either of the extract or of the dried glands, 
is completely without effect. A dried powder of the posterior 
lobe may be used as a snuff and is effectively absorbed. This 
form of treatment has the advantage that smaller doses may 
be given at more frequent intervals, though the chemist may 
find it very laborious to weigh out single doses of a few milli- 
grammes. If the diuresis fails to react to injections of extract 
the lesion is probably in the hypothalamus rather than in the 
pituitary itself. 

The poljruria in diabetes insipidus is due to a failure of 
the epithelium of the renal tubules to reabsorb chlorides 
and water. If, therefore, a drastic restriction is imposed 
on the chloride intake, diminution of the volume of urine 
results. 



296 DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 

The disease is readily distinguished from diabetes meUitus 
by the glycosuria in the latter. Chronic interstitial nephritis 
may produce marked polyuria and frequency, but albuminuria, 
a raised blood pressure, and cardiac hypertrophy will decide 
the diagnosis. In hysteria, polyuria occurs, but is purely 
transient 

P. M F. Bishop. 

•J. J. CONYBEARE. 



DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


DIABETES MELLITUS 

T he amount of glucose in the blood remains remarkably 
constant in healthy persons, and is expressed either in milli- 
grammes per 100 c.c. of blood or in grammes per cent. 
When fasting, the blood, whether arterial or venous, contains 
between 80 and 120 mg. per 100 c.c. (-080 to *120 per cent.). 
Even an hour after large amounts of carbohydrate it rarely rises 
above 170 mg. and is usually less, and within two hours it has 
fallen to the fasting level. 

The relative stability of the blood sugar is effected by the 
interaction of many factors, which may be considered separately. 

1. The Pancreas , — The internal secretion of this organ, 
produced by the islds of Langerhans and known as insulin, 
is the most important factor in the regulation of the blood 
sugar. There is a steady and continuous production of insulin 
by the healthy pancreas, and in addition its output is increased 
when food, particularly carbohydrate, is taken. The exact 
mode of action of insulin is incompletely understood, but it 
probably renders the glucose in the blood available for storage 
as glycogen in the liver and the muscles. Thus if the output 
of insulin is insufficient the blood sugar is increased, and when 
it reaches a level of approximately 170 mg. per 100 c.c. sugar 
passes through the kidneys and is excreted in the urine. This 
level of blood sugar is usually described as the renal threshold. 
When the blood sugar is below the renal threshold the urine 
contains no sugar, when it is above it glycosuria is present. 
The importance of the renal threshold is discussed later in 
connection with renal glycosuria. 

2. Liver, — This organ is the main site not only for storage 
of glycogen but for its delivery to the blood and tissues. If 
the liver is removed in an experimental animal the blood sugar 
rapidly falls to very low figures and the animal dies in h3rpo- 
glycfiemic convulsions. If adequate glucose is injected intra- 
venously the blood sugar rises and the animal recovers rapidly. 
This experimental work on hepatectomised dogs first gave 
the clue to the elucidation of the symptoms of hypoglycfismia 



298 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


in man {vide p. 312). In clinical practice hypoglycaemia as a 
result of liver dysfunction is almost unknown, as the extent of 
damage to the organ has to involve practically the whole liver. 

3. Pituitary Body , — The hormones produced by the 
pituitary, especially those of the anterior lobe, oppose the 
action of insulin and raise the level of blood sugar. Although 
hyperactivity of the pituitary through its diabetogenic hormone 
may raise the blood sugar and produce glycosuria, it is un- 
likely that this gland plays an important part in diabetes 
mellitus. 

4. Adrenals , — The internal secretion of the adrenal medulla 
(adrenalin) stimulates the conversion of glycogen in the liver 
into glucose, hence the value of adrenalin in the treatment of 
hypoglycaemia {vide p. 313). The hormone secreted by the 
adrenal cortex opposes the action of insulin and under certain 
circumstances may produce hyperglycaemia. The part played 
by the adrenals in the aetiology of diabetes is probably small. 

5. Thyroid , — Excess of thyroxin aggravates the severity 
of diabetes, and a diminution of thyroid activity lowers to some 
extent the level of blood sugar. 

Pathogenesis of Diabetes. — Although, as has been shown 
above, the liver and endocrine glands probably play a part in 
the control of the blood sugar, the most important factor in 
the development of diabetes is the pancreas. Thus the 
experimental ablation of that organ produces the disease. 
Additional proof is the fact that insulin, the internal secretion 
of the pancreas, can rectify the metabolic anomalies of diabetes. 
It is true that there are no constant post-mortem findings in 
the pancreas of diabetics. The reserve of the healthy pancreas, 
like that of other vital organs, such as the liver and kidneys, 
is very great, and probably at least seven-eighths of the gland 
must be destroyed before diabetes develops. It is not surpris- 
ing, therefore, that growths of the pancreas or even more 
widespread lesions, such as acute pancreatitis, rarely produce 
diabetes. Haemochromatosis {vide p. 468) alone of diseases 
involving the pancreas almost invariably produces diabetes. 

It is probable that diabetes more often results from one or 
both of the following factors : (i) an inherent insufficiency in 
the islet tissue or insular reserve ; (ii) disturbances of meta- 
bolism which make additional demands on the islet cells. The 
first factor, inherent insufficiency in the insular reserve, is often 
inherited and probably accounts for the frequency of familial 
and racial diabetes. The main disturbance of metabolism 
which produces diabetes is obesity. The majority of diabetics 
who develop the disease in middle or later life have been much 



DIABETES MELLITUS 


29 » 


overweight ; this throws an extra strain on all the organs, 
including the pancreas. Less often hyperthyroidism, especially 
if long continued, may produce diabetes. 

Although the metabolic disturbance in diabetes mellitus 
primarily involves carbohydrate metabolism, the disease at 
any rate in its more severe forms, if untreated, interferes with 
the metabolism of fat and protein in addition. The abnormal 
breakdown of fats produces an excess of ketone bodies, /^-oxy- 
butyric acid, aceto-acetic acid (diacetic acid), and acetone. 
Their accumulation in the blood gives rise to the clinical picture 
of ketosis and diabetic coma p. 316), and they are also 
excreted in the urine and through the lungs. In severe diabetes, 
untreated with insulin, the patient may excrete far more sugar 
than the amoimt of carbohydrate taken in the food and this 
surplus is produced by the conversion into glucose of protein 
and to a less degree of fat. If insulin and carbohydrate are 
given ketosis is abolished. 

Symptoms and Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus. — In mild 
diabetes symptoms may be completely absent for years, although 
glycosuria may be continuously present. In more severe cases 
thirst, polyuria, and loss of weight are prominent features. 
The irritation of the glucose in the urine often causes balanitis 
or pruritus of the vulva. With severe diabetes and ketosis 
the tongue becomes dry, red, and painful, and there may be 
general dehydration of the tissues. The urine contains glucose, 
often up to 5 per cent., and ketone bodies may also be present. 
Although it is true to say that all untreated diabetics pass 
sugar it cannot be assumed that the finding of glucose in the 
urine necessarily indicates diabetes. Actually this is very far 
from the truth, and many patients have been subjected to 
unnecessary hardship by the im warranted diagnosis of diabetes 
on the strength of glycosuria alone. Diabetes can be diagnosed 
with certainty when typical symptoms such as polyuria, thirst, 
and wasting are present in conjunction with glycosuria. When 
the only grossly abnormal finding is glycosuria a full investiga* 
tion is essential. The point at issue can be settled with certainty 
by the blood-sugar tolerance curve. The patient should have 
been taking a normal mixed diet for some days without restric- 
tion of carbohydrate. Having eaten no breakfast he empties 
his bladder and has a blood-sugar estimation done. This 
gives the fasting blood-sugar level. He then takes 50 grm. of 
glucose dissolv^ in approximately 100 c.c. of iced water 
fiavoured with lemon. Further blood sugars are done at half- 
hourly intervals for two and a half hours. A normal person 
will have a fasting blood sugar ranging from 80 to 120 mg. per 



300 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 

100 C.C., while that in a diabetic will tend to be considerably 
higher. In fact a fasting blood sugar of over 130 mg. is pre- 
sumptive evidence of diabetes. Diabetic and normal blood- 
sugar tolerance curves are shown in Fig. 6. It will be noted 
that in the normal person though the blood sugar may rise 
to 170 mg. or even over in the first hour after the ingestion of 
glucose, it falls rapidly and within one and a half to two hours 
it is down to or below the fasting level. A diabetic, however, 


BLOOD 

SUGAR 



TIME IN HOURS 


Fio. 5. 

A, Curve from severe diabetic. B, Curve from mild 
diabetic. C, Normal curve. 

behaves very differently. The rise of blood sugar is very 
prolonged and at the end of two hours it has quite failed to 
approximate to the fasting level, and, at any rate, in diabetes 
of moderate severity it may remain very high for hours. While 
the blood sugar is above the normal renal threshold or leak- 
point,” which is usually about 170 mg., sugar is present in the 
urine. 

In so-called renal glycosuria glucose passes through the 
kidneys at blood-sugar levels well below the normal leak-point. 
In such cases, although sugar may be more or less constantly 
present in the urine, the blood-sugar curve is perfectly normal. 
Renal glycosuria produces no symptoms and calls for no 
treatment. 

A further group of cases has been described by Maclean 
under the term “ lag curve.” An example of this is given in 
Fig. 6. It will be observed that the blood sugar rises rapidly 
to a point much in excess of the normal, but the faU to normal 




DIABETES MELLITUS 


301 


is equally abrupt and is complete within two hoiuB. Sugar is 
passed in the urine during the period when the blood-sugar 
level is above the normal renal leak-point. Maclean suggested 
that there is a delay or “ lag ” in the action of the sugar storage 
mechanism, but the rapid rise in blood sugar is more probably 
due to rapid absorption from the intestine in persons whose 
stomachs empty unusually fast. Glycosuria of the “ lag 
curve ” type is not uncommon following gastro-jejunostomy. 


Blood 



Pro. <5. 

** Lag curve.** 

None of the symptoms of diabetes are present, and there does 
not appear to be any special habUity to develop the disease. 
Occasional urine examinations and blood-sugar estimations 
should be carried out in order that early warning of any change 
in the type of glycosuria may not be overlooked. 

Transient glycosuria is not uncommon in healthy persons as 
the result of excitement, such as a life insurance examination. 
Cannon and Fiske found that out of twenty-five members of 
the Harvard University football team no fewer than twelve 
had glycosuria after the Harvard versus Yale match. That 
excitement and not exertion was responsible is proved by the 
fact that five out of the twelve who had glycosuria were acting 
as reserves and did not actually take part in the game. Such 
glycosuria is purely temporary and is due to stimulation of the 
suprarenals. A head injury or generalised convulsions, such 
as epilepsy, may lead to similar transient glycosuria. 

Examination of Urine for Sugar and Ketones. — ^This is of 
such paramount practical importance that the details of the 
tests are summarised briefly below : — 

1. Fehling's Test . — Equal amounts of Fehling’s solution 



302 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 


and urine are boiled in separate test tubes and while boiling are 
mixed. The mixture is brought back to boiling point momen- 
tarily. If sugar is present the liquid becomes turbid and the 
colour changes to green or red. Fehling’s solution is reduced to 
some extent in a concentrated urine by creatinine or uric acid. 

2. Benedict's Test. — Eight drops of the urine are run into 
a clean test tube and 6 c.c. (one teaspoonful) of Benedict's 
qualitative solution added. The mixture is then boiled for 
two minutes. If sugar is present the solution becomes turbid 
and changes colour to green, yellow, or red according to the 
quantity of sugar present. The fact that the reducing body 
is glucose can be proved by the preparation of an osazone or 
by fermentation tests with yeast. 

Tests far Kekme Bodies. — These are most important, as from 
the point of view of treatment the presence of ketones is even 
more important than is that of sugar. 

1. Roihera's Test. — ^About 10 c.c. of urine are saturated 
with crystals of ammonium sulphate, and a few dro^ of a 
freshly prepared solution of sodium nitroprusside added. The 
solution is then made alkaline with strong ammonia. A purple 
colour develops if ketones are present. 

2. Gerhardt's Test. — About 10 c.c. of the urine are placed in 
a test tube and a 10 per cent, solution of ferric chloride is added 
drop by drop. A white precipitate of phosphate forms and 
redissolves, and if diacetic acid is present the colour of the 
solution becomes red. 

Rothera’s test is very delicate and unless the purple colour 
is deep and develops rapidly, it does not necessarily indicate 
a dangerous ketosis. A strongly positive Gerhardt test, on the 
other hand, is a danger signal. If the patient has been taking 
aspirin or salicylates, the urine becomes purple or violet in 
colour with ferric chloride, which may obscure the red colour 
due to ketones. The Rothera test is unaffected by these drugs. 

Complications oi Diabetes. — These are numerous and 
important. In fact, since the advent of insulin diabetic com- 
plications are more potent factors in morbidity and even in 
mortality than the diabetes itself. Diabetic coma is dealt 
with elsewhere {vide p. 316). 

1. Boils and Carbuncles. — These are relatively common, 
especially in mild imtreated diabetes. In all such cases the 
urine should be tested for sugar. Large carbuncles are always 
especially dangerous in diabetics. 

2. Peripheral Neuritis. — This is described on page 961, 

3. Gangrene. — Elderly diabetics are specially prone to 
develop gangrene of the toes or feet. This serious complication 



DIABETES MELLITUS 


303 


is very rare before the age of fifty. Diabetic gangrene is always 
associated with atheroma of the vessels, but this is liable to 
occur at an earlier age in diabetic than in non-diabetic patients. 

There are two factors which lead to gangrene in diabetics : 

(1) impairment of the blood supply owing to arteriosclerosis ; 

(2) diminished resistance of diabetic tissues to trauma and 
infection. The extent to which the circulatory factor is 
operative may be judged from the presence or absence of pulsa- 
tion in the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries. Pain is 
often very severe, and the gangrene may be moist or dry. 

The decision as to whether amputation is necessary is often 
a very difficult one. If the gangrene is spreading rapidly, and 
no arterial pulsation can be felt, immediate amputation is 
required. When, however, there is much infection of the tissues 
and particularly when imdrained pus is present, more con- 
servative surgical measures are justifiable in conjunction 
with chemotherapy. It is frequently found that healing may 
take place in a few months, particularly if the diabetes is 
controlled with insulin. Persistent and severe pain associated 
with gangrene is an indication for early amputation. 

4. Pulmonary Tiiberculosis (vide p. 319). 

5. Ocular Complications, — (Cataract is common in elderly 
diabetics, as is diabetic retinitis, especially in arteriosclerotic 
patients. 

6. Xanthochromia and Xanthoma Diabeticorum. — Xantho- 
chromia is a yellowish discoloration of the skin, especially on 
the face and palms of the hands. It is due to carotene and 
lipochrome pigments. Its occasional appearance in diabetics 
is probably due to large amounts of vegetables in the diet. 

In xanthoma diabeticorum numerous bright yellow tumours 
appear on the skin. There is usually a high blood cholesterol. 
The condition is chiefly seen in severe diabetics. 

Types of Diabetes and Prognosis. — Diabetes may apj>ear in 
every grade of severity from a 83Tnptomless glycosuria to a 
fulminating type of the disease in which coma is the first 
symptom. Speaking generallj^ the younger the patient the more 
severe and acute the diabetes, though this is by no means 
invariably true. On the whole famihal and hereditary diabetes 
tends to be mild or moderate in severity. The great majority 
of diabetics can be maintained in perfect health and vigour 
by insulin. Needless to say, except in its mildest forms, the 
prognosis of the disease depends mainly on the patient. Con- 
sistent disregard of either diet or insulin will lead to serious 
deterioration or even death. Diabetes in children is described 
on page 315, as are the effects of pregnancy (vide p. 319). 



304 DISEASES OE METABOLISM 

Diabetes in elderly persons is usually benign in its course 
and seldom calls for more than qualitative dietetic restrictions. 
Gangrene is, however, a dangerous complication. 


TREATMENT OF DIABETES 

In the treatment of diabetes, either with or without insulin, 
four general principles must be fulfilled. 

1. The patient must be given a diet which is adequate in 
caloric value to enable him to carry on a useful and active life 
and yet avoid over-nutrition. Though occasional glycosuria 
is inevitable, the passing of large quantities of sugar must be 
prevented. 

2. The diet must be so balanced in regard to content of 
protein, carbohydrate, and fat that he does not develop 
ketosis. 

3. The diet must be so arranged that it conforms as closely 
as possible with that of normal individuals.* 

4. If treated with insulin the dosage must be regulated to 
avoid so far as is possible both hyperglycaemia and insulin 
reactions {vide p. 313). 

As regards the first of these principles, it is obvious that the 
caloric requirements of individuals must vary widely, depending 
on their age, sex, size, and occupation. Infants and children 
require diets of a relatively high caloric value to allow for 
growth as well as for the normal metabolic requirements. 
Women need about 10 per cent, fewer calories than do men. 
With increasing age caloric requirements decrease. Persons 
engaged in heavy manual work require larger diets than those 
in s^entary occupations. The terms “ basal ” and “ main- 
tenance ” diets are often used. A “ basal diet is one which 
will provide an adequate number of calories for a person at 
complete rest ; a maintenance diet is one containing 
sufficient calories for an ordinary active life. A “ maintenance 
diet contains about 30 per cent, more calories than a “ basal 
diet. From a practical point of view, however, the “ mainten- 
anoe ’’ diet is of chief importance, as the diabetic must be able 
to lead a life of unrestricted activity. For adult patients it is 
generally sufficient to allow 35 to 40 calories to each kilo of 
body-weight (16 to 18 calories per pound of body- weight). 

* War-tune reetrictionB have increased difficulties of diet for diabetics, oven 
though extra ration of moat, butter, and checao can l>e obtained by application 
through Local Food Office. T^atients are advised to join the Diabetic Association, 
9 Manchester Square, London, W. 1. The ^ysociation publishes a journal of groat 
value to diabetics, particularly during war. 



TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


305 


Thus between the ages of twenty and fifty the following figures 
may be regarded as adequate for an ordinary sedentary life 
calling for no heavy manual work : — 


Weight. 

10 stones 

11 » 

12 .. 


Caloric Requirements. 

. 2,500 

. 2,800 
. 3,100 


For female patients about 10 per cent, of the calories may be 
deducted. The caloric requirements of children are discussed 
elsewhere {vide p. 315). 

Needless to say, the nutritional state of the patient will 
have an important bearing on the caloric content of the diet. 
If the patient is emaciated, the diet must be relatively high, 
whereas in a diabetic already much overweight a lower diet is 
advisable. As a check upon the caloric value of the diet a 
careful record of the patient’s weight should be kept from 
week to week. A steady and continued increase in weight, 
except in emaciated persons, is most undesirable, while a 
steady loss of weight indicates in most cases that ^ the diet 
is too low. 

The second general principle is that the patient should 
be given a diet on which he does not develop ketosis. 
Fortunately with the aid of insulin it is now possible to 
allow every diabetic suflScient carbohydrate in relation to 
the quantity of fat in the diet to prevent the formation 
of ketone bodies. 

The amoimt of protein in the diet must be adequate to 
replace the constant breakdown of tissue protein. This should 
be in adults at least 1 grm. of protein to each kilo of body- weight. 
Probably no harm is done if this is increased somewhat, 
especially in those leading active and energetic lives, but it 
should rarely exceed 100 grm. High protein diets tend to 
render stabilisation with insulin difficult. With children and 
adolescents proportionately larger amounts of protein are 
required to allow for growth {vide p. 315). 

The carbohydrate content of the diet necessarily varies 
with the age and sex of the patient, but for an adult who is 
leading a normal active life not less than 150 grm. should be 
allowed, and it is probably preferable in most cases to give up 
to 200 grm. As much as this can rarely be taken even in mild 
diabetes except with insulin {vide p. 308). The amount of fat 
depends on the caloric requirements, but high fat diets with 
a relatively low carbohydrate content are both unpalatable, 
expensive,, p^nd tend to produce ketosis. 


20 



306 DISEASES OF METABOLISM 

The third general principle in the construction of a diabetic 
diet is that it should conform as closely as possible to the 
type of diet eaten by healthy persons. This not only saves 
expense and trouble in the household, but it enables a diabetic 
to play his part in social life and prevents the development 
of an inferiority complex. Special diabetic foods should never 
be necessary. 

Bearing in mind what has been said above, we may now 
proceed to consider the treatment of patients suffering from 
diabetes. However obvious the diagnosis may be, it is most 
important to make a thorough physical examination, including 
an X-ray of the chest, before the institution of treatment. 
This may reveal the presence of other pathological conditions 
such as tuberculosis, arteriosclerosis and heart disease, 
cholecystitis or gall-stones, focal sepsis in teeth or tonsils, all 
of which have a bearing on the treatment of the diabetes. 

Needless to say, the line of treatment to be adopted in 
individual cases will vary with the severity of the disease, and 
the first question which usually needs decision is whether the 
patient should start on insulin at once, or whether dietetic 
treatment alone should be tried to begin with. There are four 
indications for starting insulin immediately : (i) coma or 

incipient coma, (ii) the presence of considerable ketosis as 
indicated by a positive Gerhardt test (inde p. 302), (iii) com- 
plications such as phthisis or the necessity for a surgical 
operation, (iv) emaciation, where the patient obviously requires 
a high caloric diet. If none of the above conditions are present, 
it is usually justifiable — except perhaps in infants and children 
— to test the patient’s reaction to undemutrition diets. 
Starvation is never necessary, as it not only submits the patient 
to unnecessary hardship, but it also often produces ketosis, as 
the patient during starvation is really hving mainly on his own 
body fat. Below are given three test diets containing respec- 
tively approximately 950, 1,200 and 1,750 calories. In all of 
them the fat is sufficiently restricted to inhibit ketosis. The 
patient should be first of aU placed on No. 1 diet, and its effects 
noted on the excretion of sugar over a period of five to seven 
days. If on this relatively low diet, sugar does not either 
disappear or become very greatly diminished, it is obvious 
that insulin will be required. During the period of the test 
specimens of urine should be obtained four times a day and 
the results carefully recorded on a chart such as that on page 
308. Such a chart enables the progress of the case to be seen 
at a glance. 

If on diet No. 1 the patient becomes sugar-firee he may be » 



TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


307 


put on to No. 2 and later No. 3 provided he remains sugar-free. 
Later the diet may be built up with further gradual additions 
of carbohydrate and fat in equal amoimts imtil an adequate 
maintenance diet is reached. It is important that the carbo- 
hydrate in the diet should be more or less evenly distributed 
throughout the day. 

Quite apart from the dietetic treatment of diabetes, careful 
attention must be paid to the general health of the patient, 
particularly as regards focal sepsis. In the presence of an 
infection insulin, both endogenous and exogenous, works 
inefficiently. The teeth shoiild be X-rayed and any which 
may be septic removed. If the tonsils show signs of chronic 
infection tonsillectomy should be performed. Elderly diabetics 
should pay particular attention to the feet ; these should be 
washed daily, carefully dried, and sprinkled with boracic 
powder. Shoes must be large and not rub the toes. Neglect 
of these precautions increases the liability to gangrene. The 
bowels should be kept open regularly. Mental worry and 
anxiety must be avoided. Although it is never justifiable to 
promise a cure, it may be pointed out that diabetics who adhere 
carefully to the instructions given to them may live a practically 
normal and useful life for an indefinite period. 


DIABETIC TEST DIETS 
AFPBOXIMATE FOOD COMTEHT 


No. 1. 

Protoin 70gnn, 

Carbohydrate 80 „ 
Fat 40 „ 

Caloriei 950 

Breakfait 

Tomatoea. 

2 os. milk. 
oz. bread. 


Lnnoh 

3 02 . meat or fish. 

Green vegetables (6 per 
oent. group). 

1 small orange. 


No. 2. 

Ihrotein TOgrm. 

Carbohydrate 90 „ 
Fat 60 „ 

Calories 1,200 „ 

Breakfast 

I grape fruit or 1 small 
orange. 

1 egg- 

1 02 . bacon. 

Tomatoes. 

2 02 . milk. 

1 oz. broad. 

Lunch 

3 oz. meat or iish. 

Green vegetables (5 per 

oent. group). 
i 02 . oheose. 

02 . bread. 


No. 3. 

Protein 80 grm. 

Carbohydrate 140 „ 

Fat 95 „ 

Calories 1,750 „ 

Breakfast 

1 02 . oatmeal (dry weight). 
2 02 . cream. 

©gg- 

t oz. bacon. 

Tomatoes. 

2 oz. milk. 

2 oz. bread. 

Lunch 

3 oz. meat or fish. 

Green vegetables (5 per 

cent, group). 

1 oz. cheese. 

2 oz. bread. 
i 02 . butter. 



308 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


Sapper 

Clear soup. 

3 oz. meat or fish. 

Green vegetables (5 per 
cent, group). 

3 oz. potatoes. 

1 oz. cheese. 

1} oz. bread. 

Coffee (black) or tea. 


Sapper 

Clear soup. 

3 oz. meat or fish. 

Green vegetables (5 per 
cent, group). 

3 oz. potatoes (boiled). 

1 small orange. 


1 oz. cream. 


Sapper 

Clear soup. 

3 oz. meat or fish 
1 oz. bread. 

Green vegetables (6 per 
cent, group). 

3 oz. ^tatoes. 

1 smaU orange. 

1 egg. 

Coffee. 

1 oz. cream. 


Notes. — The vegetables and fruits in the 5 per cent, ^up (vide p, 314) may 
be taken as desired, as their food value is low. All other food should be carefully 
weighed, until the patient has become experienced in estimating weight. Clear 
soup, tea, coffee, have no food value and may be taken as desired. No alcoholic 
beverages and no special diabetic foods may be taken without the doctor’s permission 
When fish is taken instead of meat J oz. of butter may be added. 


UBINE CHABT 

The urine should be tested four times daily with Benedict’s qualitative solution 


(vide p. 302) and the results charted as follows : — 
Blue and clear . 

0 

Green and turbid 

“h 

Yellow and turbid 

4-h 

Red-brown and turbid 



1 IhboUh. 

Date. 

Feb. 

Early 

Momibg 

Specimen. 

Koon 

Specimen. 

6.0 F.M. 
Specimen. 

10.0 p.m. 
specimen. 

Notes. 

; 6 

5 

Ist 

+ -f 

-f 4--f 

-f + -f 

-f 4 4 

Rothera 4- 

i 10 

5 

2nd 

-i-f 

-h 

+ f-f 

-f-4- 

Rothera ± 

! 10 

10 

3rd 

T 

+ 


-4- 

Rothera — 

15 

10 

4th 

+ 

0 


4' 


i 15 

■a 



0 


0 


1 

i 

15 



0 

-f 

0 

Reaction 11.30 P.M. 

1 oz. sugar taken. 

! 

12 

7th 

0 

0 

0 

0 



Insulin Treatment. — Insulin is now available commercially 
in three forms, (a) soluble insulin (S.I.), which is an acid solution 
of insulin hydrochloride with a maximum action within two 
to four hours after injection ; (6) zinc protamine insulin (Z.P.I.), 
an alkaline suspension, which acts much more slowly {vide p. 
310) ; (c) globin insulin, which is intermediate in its action 
between soluble and zinc protamine insulin {vide p. 311). 







TREATMENT OF DIABETES 309 

Insulin is standardised in units by its effect in lowering the 
blood sugar in rabbits. Soluble insulin is supplied com- 
mercially in three strengths, 20, 40, and 80 units in each cubic 
centimetre. These strengths are often described as “ single,” 
‘‘ double,” and “ quadruple.” As a rule with doses up to about 
12 units, single ” strength insulin is used and with larger doses 
one or other of the more concentrated varieties. Z.P.I. and 
globin insulin are supplied in double or quadruple strengths. 

If insulin treatment is deemed necessary a decision has to 
be made as to whether S.I. or Z.P.I. is to be used. The latter is 
advisable, at any rate as an initial measure in stabilisation 
only in patients with relatively mild diabetes and no ketosis. 
When symptoms such as thirst, polynria, and loss of weight are 
prominent it is safer to initiate treatment with S.I. When 
stabilisation has been effected it is often possible to change to 
Z.P.I. or a combination of both. 

The patient is first put on a diet approximating to No. 3 
Test Diet {vide p. 307) containing approximately 140 grm. of 
carbohydrate. Stabilisation can be effected more rapidly and 
efficaciously in hospital than in the home, but there is rarely 
any necessity for treatment in bed. A careful urine chart 
should be kept. If S.I. is used the doses in the average case of 
only moderate severity may be these indicated on the specimen 
chart {vide p. 308). It will be noted that on the first day two 
doses are injected each of 5 units and that on subsequent 
days the total dose is increased by 5 units per diem. In more 
severe cases, especially if the urine contains much sugar and 
ketones are also present, the initial doses may be larger, e.gr., 
10 or more units each. The insulin should be given half an hour 
before the morning and evening meals. In a few cases it may 
be necessary to give insulin before the midday meal in addition 
to the morning and evening doses. 

Increases in insulin dosage are controlled mainly by the 
urinary findings. When sugar disappears or is present in very 
small amounts the insulin should be increa^ed more gradually. 
Hypoglycaeraic reactions {tride p. 312) are an indication to reduce 
the insulin or to increase the carbohydrate intake. Blood- 
sugar estimations should be made when*^the urinary sugar has 
disappeared. The blood should be taken before the morning 
or the evening injections, as the readings at these times are 
likely to be their maximum. 

When the patient has been stabilised on a basal diet, further 
increases in the diet must be made in order to raise it to a 
maintenance level. Sometimes no additional insulin is required, 
but if glycosuria recurs the amount of insulin should be 



310 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


graduaQy increased. When soluble insulin is being given it is 
advisable that the bulk of the carbohydrate should be taken 
in the meals following the injections of insulin. 

Opinions differ considerably as to the amount of carbo- 
hydrate which should be included. There is general agreement 
that a very low carbohydrate ration (e.gr., 50 grm. per diem) 
is imdesirable, as it renders the patient specially liable to 
ketosis, and is also unpalatable. Moreover, on a low carbo- 
hydrate diet patients feel less fit and less energetic than when 
larger amounts are allowed. Rabinovitch and others advocate 
extremely large amounts of carbohydrate, even up to 300 grm. 
a day. On such a diet the amoimt of fat has to be restricted 
very severely, or the patient will be found to be taking an 
over-nutrition diet. Probably it is best to give between 180 
and 200 grm. of carbohydrate daily. This allows an adequate 
amount of fat to be included. Diabetics doing heavy manual 
work will of course need a diet containing more carbohydrate 
and a high calorie content. 

Rationing during the war has inevitably led many diabetics 
to increase their carbohydrate intake very considerably. 
Many indeed are taking a practically normal diet. There is 
no evidence that this change in dietetic regime has had any 
deleterious effects, such as an increased liability to diabetic 
coma or other complications, so long as sufficient insulin is 
administered. It is possible that the restrictions on diet imposed 
in the past for insulin cases were unnecessarily severe. 

When an uncontrolled diabetic is brought under the influence 
of insulin there is often a sudden alteration in the eyesight, 
which may render reading difficult. This is due to refiuctive 
changes in the lens resulting from changes in the water balance 
of the body. The vision rapidly returns, though new glasses 
may be necessary. 

Occasionally allergic reactions develop at the site of injection 
forming red and indurated areas, which are sometimes tender. 
These usually cease to occur after a few days. If they do not 
a change of the brand of insulin to one made from a different 
animal, e,g., pig, may be effective. 

Zinc Protamine Insulin. — ^As a result of work by Hagedom 
and Scott an insulin has been produced, the action of which 
is more prolonged than is the case with ordinary insulin. 
Whereas the latter controls the blood sugar for only about 
four to five hours, the new product — ^usually known as Z.P.I. 
— ^has a far longer duration of action, probably up to twenty- 
four hours or more. Moreover, owing to slow absorption it is 
less precipitate in its action. 



TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


311 


Diabetics of only moderate severity, particularly those 
over forty years of age, can usually be controlled by a single 
morning injection of Z.P.I., but severe diabetics may need 
both kinds of insulin, soluble to control glycosuria after break- 
fast and protamine zinc to control the diabetes during the 
later part of the day and during the night. Soluble insulin 
and Z.P.I. are best injected separately, using two syringes. 
The same needle may be used if the injection site is altered by 
moving the needle under the skin. 

Z.P.I. is liable to produce severe hypoglycsemic reactions 
which sometimes come on insidiously, so that the patient may 
have no initial warning symptoms. Consequently it is important 
that the dose of Z.P.I. should be increased gradually, and 
patients who are being stabilised on this insulin should be 
under control and observation in hospital. 

Patients undergoing stabilisation with Z.P.I. should take 
approximately 150 grm. of carbohydrate a day. This should 
be spread evenly throughout the main meals and a small 
carbohydrate feed at bedtime is required. For a patient who 
has not had insulin previously, an initial morning dose of 16 to 
24 units, according to the severity of the diabetes, is advisable, 
and the dose can be increased by 6 units every third morning 
until absence of glycosuria or low blood-sugar readings indicate 
that the dose is sufficient. When a patient who has previously 
been taking two doses a day of S.I. desires to change over to 
Z.P.I., the best plan is to give him his ordinary morning dose 
of S.I. and in addition three quarters of the number of units 
of Z.P.I. as he has been accustomed to take of S.I. in the 
evening. The dose of S.I. is then gradually cut down and that 
of Z.P.I. increased until stabilisation has been effected. As 
has been stated above, it is often necessary to give both types 
of insulin indefinitely. 

The advantages of zinc protamine insulin are that in most 
diabetics of moderate severity a single daily injection replaces 
two injections of soluble insulin, and its slower absorption 
diminishes the fluctuations in blood sug£^ which sometimes 
occur in patients taking soluble insulin. It is rarely desirable 
to give doses of more than 40 units of zinc protamine insulin, 
except in conjunction with soluble insulin. 

Olobin Insvlin , — This is intermediate in its action between 
S.I. and Z.P.I. Its effect on the blood sugar begins soon after 
injection, reaches its maximum after about eight hours, and 
thereafter gradually subsides to disappear in about twenty 
hours* In some cases it may be more effective than S.I. in 
controlling glycosuria in conjunction with Z.P.I. 



312 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 

Hypoglycemic Reactions. — When insulin lowers the blood 
sugar below about 65 mg. per 100 c.c., charaoteristio 
symptoms are produced, which are usually termed hypoglycemic 
or insulin reactions. The blood-sugar level at which these 
occur varies considerably in different patients. The initial 
s 3 miptoms of a reaction are tremor, sweating, and a sensation 
of hunger, or a sinking feeling in the epigastrium. When the 
blood sugar falls there is probably increased activity of the 
suprarenals in an attempt to mobilise glucose from the tissues. 
This may readily produce the above symptoms as side effects. 
The patient also may become confused, agitated, noisy, hilarious 
or quarrelsome. Sometimes acute alcoholism is closely simu- 
lated. In more advanced hypoglycaemia there may be 
twitchings, paralyses, convulsions, and coma. Reactions are 
most likely to occur two to four hours after an injection of 
soluble insulin, but sometimes they may be delayed for eight 
hours or more. 

The factors which are likely to produce reactions in a patient 
taking insulin are as follows : — 

1. Errors in measuring the dose or the inadvertent use of 

double or quadruple strength insulin. 

2. Increase in carbohydrate tolerance after stabilisation, 

3. After recovery from infections or sepsis, both of which 

conditions produce a temporary decrease of carbo- 
hydrate tolerance. 

4. Delay or omission of a meal after an injection of insulin. 

5. Gastro-intestinal disturbances which interfere with the 

absorption of carbohydrate. 

6. Unaccustomed physical exercise, especially if prolonged. 

This is probably due to depletion of the stores of 
glycogen in the liver. 

Hypoglycaemia due to Z.P.I. often gives little warning of 
its onset owing to the gradual but prolonged fall in the blood- 
sugar level. It is likely to occur in the evening or during the 
night. The prodromal symptoms of sweating and tremor 
are often absent and continued headache and malaise may be 
prominent features. It reacts to treatment less readily than 
that due to soluble insulin, and even wdien consciousness has 
been regained relapse into coma is not uncommon, unless the 
administration of glucose is continued. 

Hypoglycaemia following soluble insulin is rarely confused 
with diabetic coma and the differential diagnosis is discussed 
elsewhere (vide p. 318). Treatment is simple if the patient 
realises the significance of the rymptoms in the early stages. 



TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


313 


Every diabetic taking insulin should carry with him a few 
lumps of sugar as an insurance against emergencies. One or 
two lumps, preferably taken with a little water, will rapidly 
cut short a reaction. In more severe cases where the patient 
is unconscious, 10 to 20 grm. of glucose should be given intra- 
venously, or a stomach tube may be passed and 50 grm. of 
sugar dissolved in a few ounces of water introduced. Hypo- 
dermic injection of adrenalin (10 minims of 1 in 1,000), repeated 
if necessary, will usually restore consciousness sufficiently to 
enable sugar to be taken by mouth. 

In rare instances spontaneous hypoglyccemia has been re- 
corded in patients with a carcinoma or adenoma of the islets 
of Langerhans in the pancreas, which produces an excess of 
endogenous insulin. The symptoms are similar to those of 
reactions due to exogenous insulin, but become progressively 
more severe and intractable. In a few instances the condition 
has been cured by surgical removal of such an adenoma. 

The occurrence of hypoglycsemic reactions in a patient 
undergoing stabihsation on insuhn usually indicates that the 
dose of insulin is too high. Rather smaller doses should be 
given, but insulin should not be completely omitted. Special 
caution should be exercised to avoid reactions in elderly patients. 
This is most important in patients with a degenerated heart 
muscle, as a severe reaction may cause anginal attacks or even 
sudden death. Young children and very emaciated diabetics 
are speciaUy prone to hypoglycaemia and in them increase in 
insulin dosage should be very carefully graduated. In such 
cases if facilities are readily available for blood-sugar estimations, 
these are helpful in enabling the medical attendant to gauge 
the effect of insulin. 

Glycosuria and Hypoglycsemia. — Although the ideal to be 
aimed at in the treatment of diabetes is a normal blood sugar 
and absence of glycosuria throughout day and night, this 
ideal can rarely be attained completely in any diabetic who 
needs insulin without the risk of hypoglycaemia. There is 
little evidence that at any rate transient rises in the blood 
sugar above the renal threshold are harmful, and it is certainly 
better that sugar should be passed in the urine than that the 
patient sliould be subjected to the discomforts, risks, or even 
dangers of hj’poglycsemia. Even without the development of 
definite hypoglycsemic symptoms many patients find that they 
feel tired and generally unfit if an attempt is made to keep them 
continuously free from glycosuria. No attempt should therefore 
be made to maintain a sugar-free urine if this involves insulin 
reactions, for the latter are certainly more incapacitating and 



314 DISEASES OF METABOLISM 

perhaps even more damaging than moderate glycosuria. In- 
crease of the carbohydrate ration may abolish reactions without 
cutting down the insulin. It is of course essential to prevent 
ketosis. 

Education of the Diabetio Patient. — ^If a diabetic patient is 
to be treated satisfactorily, it is essential to obtain his intelligent 
co-operation, or at any rate that of his relatives. In order to 
adhere to his diet the patient must learn the elements of 
dietetics, and it is equally important that he should become 
adept at testing his urine, and giving himself insulin. The 
wide recognition of the necessity for the education of diabetio 
patients has led to the publication of many diabetic manuals 
both in this country and in America, one of which the patient 
should be made to study as soon as treatment is commenced. 

Prom the beginning of treatment the patient should be 
taught to test his urine, using Benedict’s test. If the patient is 
taking insulin the injections should be given by the patient 
himself from the beginning. He should be warned to avoid 
repeated injections into the same area of skin, as this may 
produce localised atrophy, known as insvlin fat atrophy. As 
regards diet, all foods except the 5 per cent, vegetable group 
should be weighed until the patient learns to judge the size of 
a given portion with reasonable accuracy. In order to avoid 
monotony in diet the patient must have a knowledge of the 
content of various foods in common use as regards protein, 
carbohydrate, and fat in order that he may be able to vary 
his diet. 

All vegetables and fruits contain carbohydrate and they 
are classified as follows, according to the percentage of carbo- 
hydrate present in their fresh state. Tinned vegetables have 
approximately the same carbohydrate content, but tinned 
fi^ts must be forbidden owing to the syrup in which they are 
preserved. 

5 per cent, vegetables and fruits : grape fruit, cabbage, lettuce, 
cucumbers, spinach, asparagus, marrow, celery, tomatoes, 
watercress, leeks, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, mush- 
rooms, rhubarb, scarlet runners, French beans. 

10 per cent, vegetables and fruits : oranges, strawberries, 
black currants, gooseberries, blackberries, pumpkins, 
turnips, beets, carrots, onions. 

15 per cent, vegetables and fruits : plums, apricots, apples, 
pears, cherries, raspberries, green peas, artichokes, parsnips. 

20 per cent, vegetables and fruits : bananas, prunes, potatoes, 
haricot beans, boiled rice, boiled macaroni. 



TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


316 


Other sources of carbohydrate are (i) oatmeal, which 
contains about 66 per cent, of carbohydrate when weighed 
dry, (ii) bread, which, whether white or brown, contains 
approximately 60 per cent, of carbohydrate, (iii) milk. 

The 6 per cent, group of green vegetables and fruits contains 
BO little utilisable carbohydrate that they may be taken in 
unrestricted amount even by severe diabetics. ^ other groups 
must be taken only in such amounts that the total carbohydrate 
ration is not exce^ed. 

Quite apart from the regulation of the amount of carbo- 
hydrate in the diet, it is important that the total caloric value 
s^ll not be increased by too luge amounts of protein and 
fat. If these are unrestricted not only will the patient become 
obese but he is likely to develop ketosis. 

The consumption of alcohol in anything except very moderate 
amounts should be forbidden as diabetics readily develop 
alcoholic neuritis. Sweet wines and liqueurs should be avoided 
completely, but spirits, dry wines, and ordinary beer are 
relatively innocuous. 

In calculating the caloric value of foodstuffs it is essential 
to know that for practical purposes 4 calories are produced 
by 1 grm. of protein or carbohy^ate and 9 calories by 1 grm. 
of fat. A table is given on the following page showing the food 
content of some of the common foodstuffs. For more detailed 
dietetic tables manuals on diabetes should be consulted. 

Diabetes in Infants and Children. — Before the discovery of 
insulin few diabetic children survived more than a few years. 
Now with insulin they grow up normal in stature, physique, 
and intellect. 

The diabetic infant or child has to make good not only the 
wastage in its tissues, but allowance must also be made for the 
fact that it has got to grow. Consequently more liberal diets, 
especially as regards protein, are necessary than in the case of 
adults. Under 6 years, 3 to 4 grm. of protein must be given 
per kilo of body-weight ; from 7 to 12 years, 2 to 3 grm. per 
kilo ; and between 12 and adult life, 2 grm. 

The total calories of the diet must be relatively far higher 
than in the case of adults, and range from 100 calories per kilo 
in early infancy to about 50 at age 12. 

Children are more liable to develop ketosis than are adults, 
particularly when they develop any infection. Consequently 
a relatively large carbohydrate ration should be allowed. 
This should be about 100 grm. at age 5, 130 grm. at 10, and 
180 grm. or more at 15. With these amounts of carbohydrates 
there is little risk of ketosis. 



316 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 


Protbin, Cabbohydbatb, and Fat Contents or 
Common Poodsttifps 

N.B . — The figures given apply to foods as served at table unless otherwise 
indicated. 


1 oz. (=30 grm.) oontainB — 

Protein. 

Carbo- 

hydrate. 

F»t. 

Calories 

(Approxi- 

mate). 

Vegetables (6 per cent, group) . 

Grm. 

i 

Grm. 

1 

Grm. 

0 

6 

Vegetables (10 per cent, group) . 

i 

2 

0 

10 

Potatoes ..... 

1 

6 

0 

30 

Oatmeal (dry weight, uncooked) . 

5 

20 

2 

120 

Bread ..... 

3 

16 

0 

80 

Animal Foods — 





Beef (roast, average) 

7 

0 

9 

120 

Bacon (fried) 

5 

0 

15 

155 

Fish- 

Cod (boiled) .... 

6 

0 

0 

• 

25 

Herring (fresh, cooked j , 

7 

0 

3 

[ 

55 

Dairy Products, etc. — | 





Eggs (one, average size) . { 

6 

0 

6 

75 

Milk ! 

1 

H 

1 

20 

Cream (average) . . | 

1 

1 

6 

60 ' 

Cheese (Cheddar) . 

8 

0 

10 

120 

Butter or margarine . j 

0 

0 

25 

225 i 


Infections such as the specific fevers, tonsillitis, or even 
colds should be treated seriously as they reduce carbohydrate 
tolerance. The patient should be kept in bed, take plenty of 
fluids with an ample supply of carbohydrate, and if necessary 
take increased doses of insulin. Neglected infections predispose 
to coma, or may produce a permanent decrease in carbo- 
hydrate tolerance. 

Children are more prone than are adults to develop hjrpo- 
glycaemic reactions, which are often induced by increased 
activity and ph}nBical exertion. The symptoms are often 
psychical and the child may be thought to be merely naughty 
or perverse. More severe reactions with convulsions have 
sometimes been mistaken for epilepsy. 

Insulin is almost invariably necessary in diabetic children. 
In infancy it is best given at least three or perhaps four times 
daily, but when the child is of school age, if possible the number 
of injections should be reduced to two. 

Diabetic Coma and its Treatment. — Before insulin, diabetic 




TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


317 


coma was the most frequent cause of death in youthful diabetics. 
Insulin has greatly reduced its frequency and diminished its 
dangers. 

The symptoms of diabetic coma are due to the accumulation 
of aceto-acetic acid and possibly other ketone bodies in the 
blood. When coma is impending, ketone bodies are found in 
the urine, and the Gerhardt test is strongly positive. In 
addition, owing to the diminished alkali reserve, the CO* 
combining power of the blood is diminished to 20 volumes 
per cent, or less. 

In diabetic coma the ketone bodies are excreted not only 
in the urine but through the lungs, and a smell of acetone can 
often be detected in the breath. Rarely the urine may 
contain no ketones, though acetone may be present in the 
breath. In such cases there is a failure on the part of the 
kidneys to excrete the ketone bodies, which is sometimes due 
to an associated nephritis. 

Occasionally in diabetes of very acute type coma may be 
the first symptom, but in many cases the condition supervenes 
in diabetics who are the subject of an acute infection such as 
a local cellulitis, a general infection such as influenza, or even 
tonsillitis. In all infections, insulin, whether endogenous, 
i.6., secreted by the patient’s own pancreas, or exogenous, 
acts less efficiently than normally. The omission of insulin 
or dietetic indiscretions in a severe diabetic may also 
precipitate coma. 

At the onset of coma, constipation, abdominal pain and 
vomiting are common symptoms. The appetite fails and the 
amount of urine is often diminished owing to dehydration of 
the tissues. The pulse becomes thin and rapid, the blood 
pressure falls, and the intra-ocular tension is low. The patient 
becomes first confused and dazed, and if untreated, lapses into 
a coma from which he cannot be roused. The respirations are 
deep and sighing, and the term “ air-hunger ” is often applied 
to the condition. Death usually occurs within a few days 
unless insulin is given. 

Treatment of Diabetic Coma , — This is"^ quite as urgent a 
matter as that of an acute abdomen, but before starting active 
treatment with insulin it is essential that the diagnosis should 
be verified, especially when coma occurs in patients who are 
taking insulin. If hypoglycsemia is mistaken for diabetic 
coma the results are likely to be disastrous. Fortunately there 
is seldom any real difficulty in the differential diagnosis of the 
two conditions. The important points are given in tabular 
form on the following page. 



318 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 



Diabbtio CoiCA. 

Htpoolyojemia. 

Type of onset . 

Gradual (several days). 

Very sudden. 

Symptoms and signs . 

Indigestion, nausea, vomit- 
ing, abdominal pain, 
constipation. 

Air-hunger and deep respira- 
tion. 

Rapid and thin pulse. 

Ocular tension low. 

Skin dry. 

No convulsions. 

Aoetone in breath. 

Sensation of hunger. 

Shallow respiration. 

1 

Normal pulse. 

Ocular tension normal. 1 
Skin moist. 

Tremor ; convulsions in | 
late stages. 

Urine 

Sugar. ♦ 

Ketones. 

Albumen and casts common. 

Absent or trace. 

Ketones absent. 

No albumen or casts. 

Blood 

Glucose usually above 350 
mg. per 100 c.c. 

Urea often raised. 

Glucose usually below 
60 mg. per 100 c.c. 

Urea normal. 


* The presence of sugar in the urine does not necessarily preclude a diagnosis 
of hypoglycseznia as the urine may have been secreted some hours previoosly 
and retained in the bladder. 


The essential points in the treatment of coma are given 
below : 

1. Instdin, — This must be given at the earliest possible 
moment, either subcutaneously or intravenously. The latter 
route should be adopted in dangerously ill patients with failing 
circulation. The insulin in such a case should be given in a 
pint of saline to which glucose (see below) has been added. 
The dose will vary with the degree of coma. If the patient is 
completely unconscious, between 100 and 200 units should 
be given during the first three hours of treatment, an injection 
being given hourly. Protamine zinc insulin should not be 
used owing to its slow rate of absorption. 

2. Olucose, — During the first few hours of treatment 
1 grm. of glucose should be given for every unit of insulin 
injected. The object of giving glucose is to abolish ketosis 
and to prevent unexpected hypoglycaemia. In comatose 
patients glucose is best administered by stomach tube after 
washing out the stomach. An Einhom tube is readily swallowed 
even by a comatose patient if the bulb of the tube is pushed 
well to the back of the pharynx. It can be left in position for 
the later administration of fluids. 

3. Dehydration , — ^Patients in coma are always dehydrated. 





TREATMENT OF DIABETES 


319 


This is best combated in patients with circulatory failure by 
axillary or intravenous drip salme. In comatose patients at 
least 2 pints should be given early in treatment. Fluid may 
also be given direct into the stomach, but it is important not 
to give more than about 5 oz. each hour, smce large quantities 
may induce vomiting or even acute dilatation of the stomach. 
Rectal saline may also be given. 

4. Constipation , — ^An enema should be given, if the patient 
is not too collapsed, and a rectal saline drip started subsequently. 

5. Circulatory Failure , — ^The patient must be kept warm 
and nikethamide (Coramine) be given hypodermically. After 
recovery, he should be kept in bed for a week. 

6. Infection and Sepsis . — Coma is frequently induced by 
infection and sepsis. A careful physical examination should 
be made and if there is any collection of undratned pus, it 
should be dealt with surgically at the earliest possible moment. 

Patients in diabetic coma should be under continuous 
medical observation, as the condition may change fix)m hour 
to hour. Urine should be obtained, by catheterisation if 
necessary, every three hours, and if the results of blood-sugar 
estimations are readily available, these are helpful in deciding 
on the subsequent dosage of insulin. The response of the 
patient as judged by his clinical condition is of great importance. 
If there are no signs of return of .consciousness further doses 
of insulin as large as those given initially may be required. 
The total amount of insulin given during the first twenty-four 
hours of treatment varies from about 150 to 500 units. When 
in doubt it is safer to err on the side of too much rather than 
too little insulin. For several days after coma the diet should 
consist mainly of carbohydrates ; fat should be reduced to a 
minimum. 

Tuberculosis in Diabetics. — While insulin does not appear 
to have appreciably decreased the incidence of tuberculosis 
among diabetics, it has certainly much improved what used to 
be a very grave prognosis. Unfortimately incipient phthisis 
is rarely diagnosed in diabetic patients, as its early symptoms 
are often attributed to the diabetes. Deterioration in a 
diabetic should always arouse a suspicion of tuberculous 
infection and calls for thorough investigation. 

A diabetic with phthisis should always take insulin and 
should be kept on a high caloric diet. The carbohydrate 
should be over 200 grm. daily, and an ample supply of milk 
is advisable, as well as cod-liver oil. 

Pregnancy and Diabetes. — Before the discovery of insulin 
pregnancy was rare except in very mild diabetics, and in most 



320 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 

severe cases amenorrhoea was constantly present. With effective 
iTiRiilin treatment pregnancy has become not uncommon. 

Most pregnant diabetics show a definite loss of carbohydrate 
tolerance, especially from the sixth month imtil delivery. 
This usually necessitates an increase in insulin, which may be 
as much as 50 per cent. Foetal death is very common during 
the later months of pregnancy unless the diabetes is well 
controlled. Pregnancy produces an increased liability to ketosis, 
and therefore a relatively high carbohydrate diet is required. 
The carbohydrate should be not less than 200 grm. per diem, 
and the protein allowance should be at least grm. per kilo 
of body-weight. The blood sugar should not be allowed to 
exceed 0-16 per cent. Termination of pregnancy is now very 
rarely necessary. 

It must be realised that the presence of a reducing substance 
in the urine of a pregnant woman does not necessarily indicate 
that she is suffering from diabetes. Osazones should always 
be prepared to exclude the possibility of lactose in the urine 
during the later stages of pregnancy. Also a blood-sugar 
tolerance curve is called for in cases where the patient is not 
obviously diabetic. During pregnancy a low renal threshold 
for glucose is not at all uncommon and considerable amounts 
of sugar may be passed, even though the blood sugar is within 
normal limits. Restriction of diet in such ca^ does nothing 
but harm. Glycosuria during pregnancy should be thoroughly 
investigated, as a mild or potential diabetic may develop 
obvious symptoms for the first time during a pregnancy. 

Operations on Diabetics. — With the aid of insulin surgical- 
operations on diabetics have become possible, which in 
pre-insulin days would have proved inevitably fatal. No 
diabetic, however mild, should undergo an operation without 
being put on insulin. If the operation is not an urgency, the 
patient should be stabilised on insulin and a diet containing 
about 200 grm. of carbohydrate with a low fat content. For 
the twenty-four hours immediately preceding operation he 
should take orange juice with glucose, oatmeal gruel, and beef- 
tea. Three hours before operation he should take orange 
juice with 50 grm. of glucose, which should be administered 
half an hour a^r 25 units of insuhn. 

If the operation is an urgent one, it should not be delayed 
owing to the diabetes for more than a few hours. If the patient 
is already taking insulin, his usual dose should be doubled and 
given at the earliest possible moment. K he is taking zinc 
protamine insulin this should be discontinued temporarily and 
soluble insulin substituted. Glucose should be given by mouth 



ACIDOSIS AND ALKALOSIS 32i 

or rectum. A further specimen of urine should be obtained, if 
possible, after two hours, and if this contains sugar and ketones, 
further insulin should be injected. It is not necessary, indeed 
it is usually impossible, to abolish glycosuria, but the control 
of ketosis is most important. After operation glucose should 
be given in intravenous saline until fluids can be taken by 
mouth. If possible 100 grm. of glucose should be taken daily for 
some days following operation. Insulin should be given in small 
but frequently repeated doses, the actual amount to be determined 
on the results of frequent urine and blood-sugar examinations. 

Local or spinal anaesthesia should be employed if possible, 
but if a general anaesthetic is necessary, gas and oxygen is to 
be preferred. Ether is less satisfactory owing to liability to 
post-operative vomiting, and chloroform should never be used. 


ACIDOSIS AND ALKALOSIS 

Acidosis is said to be present when there is a diminution in 
the alkali reserve in the blood. It cannot be regarded as a 
disease in itself and it may arise under many varjnng conditions. 
In children there is often an acidosis in cyclic vomiting, but 
there is no evidence that acidosis is the cause of the condition. 
Acidosis also occurs in starvation or severe and protracted 
vomiting. It also may be present in diabetes and nephritis. 

Since acidosis is practically always associated with, and 
dependent on, some other pathological condition, the symptoms 
present in a patient with acidosis are mainly dependent on the 
underlying disease. In severe acidosis the most characteristic 
feature is the deep respiration, often termed “ air-hunger."* 
This perhaps depends on the action of the acid on the respiratory 
centre. Acidosis is often accompanied by headache, nausea, 
and vomiting. 

Acidosis can be prevented by giving adequate amounts of 
carbohydrate and restricting the amount of fat in the diet. 
The administration of glucose and sodium bicarbonate will 
often relieve symptoms of acidosis. 

Alkalosis implies an increase in the alkali reserve in the 
blood. It is an uncommon condition but sometimes arises from 
the ingestion of large amounts of alkali, such as may occur in 
the intensive alkaline treatment of peptic ulcer or of nephritis. 
When there is severe vomiting in pyloric stenosis, alkalosis 
may follow the loss of acid in the vomit. When alkalosis is 
considerable the blood urea may be much elevated and the 
patient may aiso show signs of tetcmy. 


21 



322 DISEASES OF METABOLISM 

The chief 83 nnptoins of alkalosis are headache, tiaUseA) 
vomiting, anorexia, and drowsiness. If the condition is due 
to the taking of alkaline medicines, these must be discontinued 
at once, and plenty of fluids given by mouth or rectum. If 
it is due to pyloric stenosis, operation is required {vide p. 410). 


GOUT 

Gout £3 a disease characterised by the deposition of sodium 
biurate in the joints, an increase in the amoimt of uric acid in 
the blood, and a tendency to the development of nephritis. 

iEtiology. — Referring to gout, Sydeifliam, himself a sufferer 
from the disease, wrote, ‘‘ More wise men than fools are victims 
of the affection.” Although at the present time gout is con- 
siderably less common than it was a century ago, the disease 
is certainly more common in private than in hospital practice*. 

Many factors such as climate, heredity and over-indulgenca 
in food and drink have been regarded as of importance in the 
aetiology of gout. Of these, perhaps the most important is 
heredity. Probably 50 per cent, of the cases have a gouty 
family history. Gout in women is excessively rare. Alcohol 
has always been regarded as a most important factor in the 
production of the disease, but it would appear that fermented 
liquors, such as beer and wines, are more deleterious than 
are distilled spirits such as whisky or gin. Perhaps an even 
more important predisposing factor than alcohol is persistent 
overeating. In all probability the frequent occurrence of 
gout among the English upper classes in the eighteenth century 
was due to the large meals and liberal indulgence in port which 
were so characteristic of that period. 

Gout is imcommon before forty, and such cases as occur at 
an earlier age are nearly always inherited. 

Pathology. — Although the most striking symptom in gout 
is an arthritis associated with the deposition of sodium biurate 
in the cartilages of the joints and periarticular tissues, the 
disease is more than an arthritis and must be classified under 
the heading of metabolic disorders. 

All cell nuclei contain nucleic acid, which is combined 
with protein. It is fix)m this that the uric acid of the urine 
is derived. Normally about 1 grm. of uric acid is excreted 
daily in the urine, and this is derived from two sources : the 
nucleic acid molecule in the food and that derived from the 
breakdown of cell nuclei in the body. The former is known 
as the exogeruma and the latter as the endogenovs uric acid. 



GOUT 


323 


On a purin-free diet endogenous uric acid is alone excreted, 
but the amount varies in each individual, ranging from 0-5 
to 0*7 grm. a day. When purin-containing food, such as liver, 
kidney, or pancreas, is eaten, only about 25 to 60 per cent, 
of the purin appears in the urine as uric acid ; the balance is 
probably destroyed in the blood. 

Normally, the blood contains about 2 to 3*6 mg. of uric 
acid per 100 c.c., which circulates in the form of sodium biurate. 
In patients with gout there is an increased percentage of uric 
acid in the blood, and even when foods containing purin are 
avoided the blood uric acid amounts to between 4 and 7 mg. 
per 100 c.c., or approximately two to three times that in normal 
blood. The output of endogenous uric acid in gouty patients is 
usually low. For a few days before an attack of gout the uric 
acid excretion falls, but after the development of symptoms a 
rise in the excretion takes place, with a diminution in the uric 
acid in the blood. Prom these facts it would appear that in 
gout there is a retention of uric acid by the kidneys, but whether 
the symptoms of gout are solely due to such a retention is more 
doubtful, as it has been clearly proved that in other diseases, 
such as nephritis and leukaemia, there is often a considerably 
greater excess of uric acid in the blood than is the case in gout, 
though in such cases of uric acid retention no symptoms of 
gout occur. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Gout in itself is not a fatal disease, but 
death often takes place as a result of associated conditions 
such ats arteriosclerosis with cerebral haemorrhage, or chronic 
nephritis with uraemia. A gouty joint examined at autopsy 
shows, in the cartilage, patches and streaks of a white chalky 
material consisting of sodium biurate ; this is also found in the 
periarticular tissues such as ligaments, tendons, and synovial 
membranes ; in severe and chronic cases the deposition of 
sodium biurate may infiltrate the skin, which eventually 
ulcerates, leaving the chalky material exposed ; the ends of the 
bones in the neighbourhood of joints affected by chronic gout 
show areas of absorption, translucent in an X^ray plate, where 
the bony tissue has been replaced by sodium biurate. The joints 
most Commonly affected are the metatarso-phalangeal joints 
of the big toes, the joints of the fingers, the ankles, toees, 
and wrists. In addition to the deposits of sodium biurate in 
the joints, a similar condition is found in the cartilage of the 
ear ; these deposits are very small and are known as tophi. 

Symptoms. — Acvie OotU . — ^The clinical picture of an attack 
of acute gout is so characteristic that the disease in this stage 
is seldom misdiagnosed. The patient as a rule has been in go^ 



324 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 


health, and is awakened during the night by acute pain in 
one of the big toes. The pain is excruciating, and there is a 
burning sensation, as if a hot iron was being pushed into the 
toe-joint ; pressure or movement aggravate the pain. With 
the approach of morning the symptoms abate somewhat, but 
the joint is red and glazed in appearance, slightly swollen and 
very tender. The temperature is usually raised and there is 
anorexia and malaise. The pain recurs on successive nights 
and the joint becomes more markedly swollen ; the surrounding 
skin is oedematous, and the disease may involve the big toe 
on the other foot, or less commonly other joints. In about a 
week the symptoms disappear and the patient often feels 
remarkably fit. Recurrences of acute gout follow the first attack, 
usually within a year, and in the absence of treatment and 
attention to diet and regime may become increasingly 
firequent. 

Chronic GotU . — ^After a number of repeated attacks of acute 
gout a condition arises in which there is never complete relief 
^m symptoms. The joints, especiafiy those of the big toes, 
of the tarsus, and of the fingers, are much deformed ; tophi 
appear in the cartilages of the ears or around the joints, and 
there is often swelling of the olecranon and prepatellar bursae. 
Suppirration never occurs, although the chalky material may 
ulcerate through to the surface. 

The sufferer fiom gout, whether in the acute or chronic 
stage, is notoriously irritable, but yet retains his intellectual 
powers unimpaired. On physical examination the heart is 
often found to be enlarged to the left, and the blood pressure 
is raised. Traces of albumen are common, and if renad function 
tests are carried out they often reveal a diminished excretory 
power in the kidneys. 

Many other symptoms occmring in patients, with or without 
obvious gout, have been ascribed to “ suppressed gout ” or a 
“ gouty diathesis.” Among these are eczema, brittle nails, 
conjunctivitis, and iritis. 

Diagnosis. — Chronic gout with deformity of the joints may 
be misdiagnosed as rheumatoid arthritis, but the presence 
of tophi and a raised blood uric acid should help to avoid 
confusion. Recovery of function in gouty joints is much more 
rapid than it is in cases of infective arthritis. 

Treatment. — Sufferers from gout or even those with a 
family history of the disease should be specially abstemious 
as regards both food and drink. By reasonable physical 
activity and dietetic restriction they should endeavour to 
keep themselves well below average weight. 



OBESTTY 


326 


Poods which contain excess of purins, such as sweetbreads, 
kidneys, and liver, are forbidden. Meat may be allowed in 
moderation but the diet should mainly consist of vegetables, 
bread, fresh fruit, and cheese. Most though not all gouty 
subjects find from practical experience that beer and wine 
bring on attacks. 

During acute attacks the affected limb must be covered 
with cotton wool and the pressure of the bedclothes avoided 
by the use of a cradle. Hot fomentations or lead and opium 
lotion may be apphed locally. Colchicum is almost specific in 
reheving the pain. It should be given with sahcylate and an 
alkah (tinct. colchici minims 15, sod. sal. gr. 20, pot. bicarb, gr. 30, 
extract, glycyrrhizae liq. minims 10, aqua menth. pip. ad oz., four- 
hourly). Colchicum irritates the gastro -intestinal tract and 
should not be taken for more than three to four days. The 
bowels should be opened with a saline purgative. Colchicine 
(tJ?? taken as a pill every two hours is usually most effective 
and relieves the symptoms within twenty-four hours. Copious 
fluids should be taken. 

Cinchophen (atophan) may produce toxic jaundice and 
should not be used unless all other drugs, such as colchicine 
and salicylates, have failed. Hepatic efficiency tests should 
be performed before its administration. If these are normal 
it may be given in 7| gr. doses' thrice daily for three days. 
No more should be given for six days. 

Spa treatment has long been popular in the treatment of 
gout. It is doubtful whether the various waters have any 
specific action on the disease, though, undoubtedly, the 
regulated life and diet are beneficial. 

OBESITY 

The disadvantages, or rather the dangers, of obesity have 
only been fully realised within comparatively recent years. 
Even at the present time overweight is still only too often 
regarded by the layman as an indication of robust health. 

Needless to say, there is no satisfactory formula for ascer- 
taining the ideal weight in relation to age, sex, and height. 
The experience of life assurance companies is embodied in the 
table given in the Appendix on life Assurance Examina- 
tion (v^ p. 1143). Though the figures in the table give an 
indication of the average weights, a person even 20 per 
cent, above the tabular weight is not necessarily unduly 
obese. 

The best criterion of obesity is not so much the patient’s 



326 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


weight as his or her appearance. The general build, and 
in particular the abdominal girth in relation to the chest 
measurement, are perhaps the most reliable guides. When the 
abdominal measurement exceeds that of the unexpanded chest, 
the individual may always be regarded as too lat. 

No one likes to be accused of obesity, and it is rare to meet 
any person, however fat, who will admit to overeating as a 
causative factor. The patient prefers to ascribe the condition 
to familial predisposition, while the physician often postulates 
somewhat hypothetical disorders of the endocrines. Though 
xmdoubtedly pathological obesity may occur as the result of 
endocrine upset, it is probably true to say that overeating 
and a sedentary life account for the majority of cases. 
Heredity is also a potent factor. 

It is often stated that alcohol produces obesity. To a 
certain extent this is true, at any rate, as regards the chronic 
beer drinker. Too often, however, the total abstainer and 
non-smoker in compensation for his self-denial is apt to 
consume a diet quite out of proportion to his needs, which 
often includes an excessive amount of sweets and chocolate. 

Exercise is more effective in the prophylaxis than in the 
cure of obesity, for, unfortimately, once the condition is well 
established a vicious circle is set up, as the physical disabilities 
induced by obesity forbid adequate exercise. 

Dangers o! Obesity. — ^The statistics of life assurance com- 
panies prove quite conclusively that the unduly obese are 
bad lives. The special dangers are classified below : — 

1. Operations, especially abdominal, are notoriously more 
diflScult and dangerous in the obese than in the spare individual. 
Moreover, the prognosis in acute infections, such as pneumonia, 
is distinctly unfavourable in the obese. 

2. Diabetes is very frequently associated with obesity. 

3. Cholecystitis and gall-stones are more common in obese 
than in spare persons. 

4. Osteo-arthritis, particularly in the lower extremities. 

5. Varicose veins are frequently troublesome. 

6. Chronic Diseases . — In obesity there is a tendency to 
fatty infiltration of the heart muscle. Chronic bronchitis, 
hypertension, and angina are often associated conditions. 

Obesity in Endocrine Disorders.— The thyroid and pituitary 
glands are known to influence fat metabolism. H 3 rpothyroidism 
or myxoedema is always associated with some degree of obesity, 
as are certain anomalies of pituitary secretion, such as 
FrOhlich’s and Cushing’s syndromes. At the menopause there 
is often a tendency for the weight to increase rather rapidly. 



OBESITY 327 

perhaps as a result of ovarian hypofunction. Similarly, 
castration results in adiposity, which is also common in the 
adreno-genital s 3 iTidrome {vide p. 286). 

Treatment. — In obesity, not obviously related to disorders 
of the endocrine glands, much can be done by readjustment 
of the general regime, especially as regards diet. The con- 
stituent of food which is mainly responsible for the production 
of obesity is carbohydrate, and this, therefore, needs to be 
restricted in anti-obesity diets. The factor limiting this 
restriction is the palatability of the diet, and it is usually 
necessary to give up to 120 grm. per diem. As it is desirable 
that the patient should consume his own fat, the intake of 
fats must be severely restricted. It is usually impossible to 
cut down this to below 40 to 50 grm. per diem. Proteins 
may be taken in normal amounts as they are not productive 
of obesity in themselves and also have a tendency to increase 
metabolism. 

The following diet has been proved effective in the Dietetic 
Clinic at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, and is not 
unpalatable : — 

Approximately : CHO = 116; Pro. = 70 ; Fat = 52 ; Calories = 1,200. 

Breakfast — 

Tea or coffee with milk from ration. 

1 orange or half grape fruit. 

1 oz. brown bread (one thin slice), or 2 Ryvita or Vitaweat biscuits. 

1 egg or 1 oz. (one thin slice) of lean ham or tongue. 

Butter from ration. 

Dinner — 

Bovril, Oxo, or clear soup ad lib. if desired. 

An average helping (2^ oz.) of any lean meat (except pork), fish (not 
fried), poultry or game (except goose or duck), or rabbit. 

l^rge helping of any vegetable, except potatoes, peas, beans, or lentils. 

Fresh fruit salad when possible (no oil or cream in dressing). 

Fruit, 4 oz, of 10 per cent, group {vide p. 314). 

4 oz. (one section) cheese. 

2 water biscuits, or J oz. (half thin slice) brown bread. 

No sweet wine, beer, stout, spirits, or aerated i^aters. 

Tea — 

Tea with milk from ration. 

oz. brown broad (one and a half thin slices) made into a sandwich 
with tomato, lettuce, or cress. 

Supper — 

Bovril, Oxo, or clear soup ad lib. if desired. 

Average helping (2J oz.) lean meat, fish, etc., as at dinner. 

Vegetable and fruit as at dinner. 

J oz. brown bread (half thin slice) or 1 Ryvita biscuits 



328 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 


Daily — 

Butter, } oz. 

Milk, J pint. 

No sugar to be used — saooharine can be substituted if desired. 

Drink plenty of water in between meals. 

The following articles should be completely forbidden : all 
forms of sugar, chocolates, jam, and the like ; potatoes ; green 
peas ; all starchy foods such as rice or macaroni. The fat- 
containing fish, such as sardines and salmon, are better 
avoided. The intake of salt should be limited to that used 
in cooking. Consumption of beer, stout, and sweet wines, 
such as port, must be stopped, but spirits in small quantities 
or light wines, such as claret, probably do no harm. Fluids 
can be taken in normal amounts but are best drunk between 
rather than with meals. 

In conjunction with dietetic restrictions on the above lines 
an attempt must be made to encourage physical exercise, 
which need not, however, be violent. If the patient is both 
elderly and obese, undue exercise is likely to be not only 
ineffective but dangerous. 

The value of drugs in obesity is doubtful, except where there 
is definite evidence of endocrine disorder. Many proprietary 
remedies contain thyroid and if used indiscriminately may be 
dangerous. No patient should be allowed to take thyroid 
except under close medical supervision. It must be remem- 
bered that the action of thyroid is to some extent cumulative. 
The citrates are often prescribed but there is little evidence 
that they have any effect. Dinitrophenol preparations are 
definitely dangerous and should never be given. 

In obesity following the menopause, thyroid extract is often 
effective not only in controlling the weight but in the alleviation 
of the manifold symptoms so often present at that period. The 
dose may need to be gradually increased up to 5 gr. a day 
or more. Thyroid is also extremely valuable in myxocdema. 
Pituitary extract is, however, probably completely ineffective 
in obesity due to disorders of that gland. 

Unfortunately, it is easier to give instructions as to diet 
than to see that they are carried out. Rigid adherence to a diet 
which will produce steady loss of weight needs, as a rule, more 
determination and self-control than the average subject of 
obesity can muster. Hence the value of spa treatment with 
its strict dietetic control and routine exercise. Under a satis- 
factory dietetic regime about 2 to 3 lbs. should be lost weekly. 
Too rapid a loss may produce lassitude and exhaustion. 



VITAMIN DEFICIENCY DISEASES 


329 


Adiposis Dolorosa {Dercum's disease ), — ^This condition occurs 
chiefly in middle-aged females, who become enormously obese, 
and develop diffuse and often symmetrical masses of fat on 
the trunk and limbs, which are extremely tender on pressure. 
In addition the patient is usually depressed and emotional, 
and the obesity leads to asthenia. Although adiposis dolorosa 
has been attributed to pituitary dysfunction there is no 
evidence in support of this view. Treatment is unsatisfactory 
but dieting and thyroid extract may be tried. 


VITAMIN DEFICIENCY DISEASES 

The vitamins are accessory food factors necessary for ‘ 
normal growth and the maintenance of health. They may be 
conveniently divided into two main groups, water-soluble and 
fat-soluble. Vitamins of the same group are found in similar 
foodstuffs, so that single vitamin deficiencies rarely, if ever, 
occur in clinical practice. The relative degrees of deficiency of 
each of the vitamins differs in nearly every patient, since few 
people take exactly similar diets ; as a result of this, the clinical 
features of the vitamin deficiency diseases show great variations. 

Several vitamins can now be synthesised and the existence 
of others has been proved, but our knowledge is far from com- 
plete and there is little doubt that many more vitamins remain 
to be discovered. 

Consideration of the foregoing facts makes it clear that the 
essential measure in therapeutic or prophylactic treatment must 
be to provide an adequate diet of natural foodstuffs, and that 
synthetic vitamins should only be used to help in relieving acute 
gross deficiencies and to act as incomplete substitutes when the 
necessary natural foods are not available or cannot be assimilated. 

Much has been written on “ subclinical ” deficiencies during 
the past few years, but the available evidence tends to show 
that there is a wide margin of safety, and health is not im- 
paired until gross deficiency is present. The first appreciable 
effect of experimental deficiency of most vitamins is the onset 
of various subjective symptoms, such as lassitude, depression, 
irritability, weakness, anorexia, insomnia, and possibly an 
increased susceptibility to infections ; clinically there are many 
far commoner causes of these symptoms which are, therefore, 
of little help in the diagnosis of early vitamin deficiencies. 

Two important deficiency diseases — ^rickets and infantile 
scurvy — are described in the section dealing with diseases of 
infants {vide pp. 237, 234). 



330 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 


The fat-soluble vitamins : — 

Vitamin A. — Present in butter, eggs, and all animal fats* 
and synthesised in the body from carotene, a red pigment 
found in certain vegetables, especially carrots. 

The early manifestations of vitamin A deficiency are the 
keratinisation of epithelial tissues and the development of 
night-blindness. The former eflfect usually first appears as 
follicular hyperkeratosis of the skin. Night-blindness can be 
due to a pure vitamin A deficiency, but recent work suggests 
that deficiency of other vitamins may play a considerable 
part in its production. It must be remembered that factors 
unconnected with any vitamin deficiency can also be responsible 
for night-blindness. In children, lack of vitamin A results 
in imperfect formation of the enamel of the teeth. 

Vitamin D. — Present in animal fats. Deficiency in children 
gives rise to rickets {vide p. 237). There is little known about 
the role of vitamin D in adults. 

Vitamin E. — Present in vegetable oils, especially wheat- 
germ oil. There is considerable evidence that vitamin E is 
beneficial in some cases of recurrent abortion. Recent work 
does not support earlier claims of its value in the treatment of 
the muscular dystrophies and motor neurone disease. 

Vitamin K, — Present in kale, spinach, and other vegetables, 
requires the presence of bile-salts for its absorption from the 
gut, and is therefore liable to become deficient in cases of 
obstructive jaundice. It is essential for the formation of 
prothrombin in the liver, and given parenterally to patients 
with obstructive jaundice it prevents their abnormal tendency 
to bleeding, provided there is no gross liver damage. It is of 
value in haemorrhagic disease of the newborn, where the 
prothrombin level is low. 

The water-soluble vitamins : — 

Vitamin B complex. — Includes several known factors and 
probably others not yet identified. Here only vitamin Bj 
and two members of the vitamin Bg complex, riboflavin and 
nicotinic acid, will be considered. 

The chief sources of the members of the vitamin B complex 

whole-wheat (not white flour), yeast, vegetables, and dairy 
products. 

Vitamin B| (Anenrin). — ^The early signs of deficiency of this 
vitamin are palpitations, tachycardia, loss of vibration sense 
in the legs, tenderness of the calf muscles, and the loss of 
reflexes. 



VITAMIN DEFICIENCY DISEASES 331 

Ribojlavin , — Several conditions residt from deficiency of 
this vitamin. The hps develop a deep vermilion colour with 
a thin, shiny, and denuded mucosa, a condition known as 
cheilosis. Painful ulcerations occur at the angles of the mouth 
(angular stomatitis) and these may have a superimposed monilia 
infection when the condition is called perlfeche. The tongue is 
clean, but sore, and is usually purphsh red with enlarged 
flattened papillae. 

Eye lesions are sometimes the earliest signs and consist 
mainly of comeal vascularisation with photophobia and itching 
and burning of the eyes. 

Nicotinic Acid , — ^The earliest lesions in cases of deficiency 
of this vitamin are a glossitis in which the tongue is sore, clean, 
fiery red, and shiny, and a dermatitis on exposed parts of the 
body. The later lesions are described under pellagra. 

The evidence in support of claims for the existence of a 
causative relationship between nicotinic acid deficiency and 
infections with Vincent’s organisms is far from conclusive. 

Vitamin C . — Vide p. 333. 

Beri-beri and Pellagra 

In the past there have been many theories about the aetiology 
of these two diseases, but it is no\<^ recognised that both are 
essentially due to vitamin deficiencies, although certain other 
factors may be contributory causes. In recent years beri-beri 
has been said to be due to vitamin deficiency and pellagra 
due to nicotinic acid deficiency. It is now considered that both 
these diseases are due to a multiple B-complex deficiency, 
beri-beri being produced when the deficiency of vitamin B^ 
is dominant, and pellagra when nicotinic acid is mainly deficient. 
This theory is supported by the fact that a deficiency of only 
one member of the B-complex is extremely unhkely and that 
beri-beri and pellagra show great variety in their symptomato- 
logy, many of the symptoms being common to both diseases ; 
probably riboflavin deficiency plays an important role in both. 
In fact, it is best not to look upon beri-beri and pellagra as two 
definite diseases, but rather as convenient labels for the two 
extremes of all the symptom-complexes found in vitamin B 
complex deficiency. 

Beri-beri 

Morbid AruiUmy , — ^The post-mortem findings are those 
associated with cardiac incompetence and peripheral neuritis, 
the nerves of the legs being particularly affected. 



332 


DISEASES OF METABOLISM 


Symptoms , — ^Either the cardiac or neuritic lesions may pre- 
dominate, giving rise to “ wet ” or “ dry ” beri-beri, respectively. 

The onset of beri-beri is insidious ; early symptoms are 
weakness or a feeling of weight in the legs, palpitation, and 
dyspnoea. The knee jerks are diminished and ultimately 
completely lost ; symptoms referable to sensory nerves also 
occur in the form of paraesthesiae, patches of cutaneous anaes- 
thesia, and tenderness of the calves. The weakness of the legs 
gradually increases, and there is obvious muscular wasting, 
unless this is obscured by oedema. The muscles show the 
reaction of degeneration. 

The heart is always enlarged, and there is often a marked 
engorgement of the veins. Occasionally cardiac failure occurs 
early and results in sudden death. 

Diagmsis , — The combination of peripheral neuritis with 
oedema presents a picture seen in no other disease. It is im- 
portant, however, to avoid overlooking cases where the main 
symptoms are neuritic. Tenderness of the calves, diminution 
of the knee jerks, and areas of parsesthesia or anaesthesia 
should arouse suspicion of beri-beri when they occur among 
persons whose diet is open to suspicion. 

Treatment . — As in all diseases, prevention is better than 
cure, and the provision of food containing the vitamin B 
complex is a sure protection against beri-beri. The most 
satisfactory method of supplying the deficiency, in armies or on 
board ship where fresh food is difficult to obtain, is to substitute 
whole-meal for white bread. If rice forms the staple article of 
diet, as it does in many eastern countries, it should be undermilled 
in order that part of the vitamin-containing husk may be retained. 

When there is evidence of cardiac involvement, the patient 
must be strictly confined to bed, and careful nursing is essential. 
When oedema is marked, saline purgatives should be given. 
A good mixed diet with plenty of milk, fresh meat, and vege- 
tables must be ordered, and in addition, yeast and whole- 
wheat should be added to the diet to supplement its vitamin 
content. Several proprietary preparations of vitamin B^ 
(aneurin) are available and can be given either by mouth or 
by injection, but it must be remembered that this is not the 
only vitamin which is deficient. 

Pellagra 

Pellagra is a chronic disease characterised by gastro-intestinal 
and nervous symptoms, and an erythematous rash. 

Symptoms . — ^The most characteristic, though not necessarily 



SCURVY SS3 

the earliest, manifestation of the disease is an erythematous 
rash of somewhat peculiar t}^ and distribution. In its early 
stage it resembles an erythema, such as may be produced by 
sunbmm or a mustard plaster ; later, the skin becomes thickened 
and resembles parchment, and there is often pigmentation 
with desquamation of the epithelium. The rash is most 
commonly seen on the parts of the body exposed to sunlight, 
particularly the back of the hands and aroimd the wrists and 
neck ; the extensor rather than the flexor surfaces are affected. 
The skin condition starts most commonly during the spring 
and tends to disappear after a few months, only to recur during 
the following spring. 

The gastro -intestinal tract is often affected. Vague digestive 
disturbances, such as flatulence and eructations, are common ; 
the tongue is red and desquamated, and the patient frequently 
complains of a burning sensation in the mouth ; there is per- 
sistent diarrhoea in the later stages. 

The most serious feature of the disease is the involvement 
of the central nervous system, which tends to occur in the more 
chronic and severe cases, many of whom ultimately end their 
days in an asylum. Subjective symptoms such as depression, 
insomnia, and headache are common, and not infrequently 
these progress to a definite dementia with hallucinations and 
delusions, which may necessitate certification. In the spinal 
cord, pathological findings, similar to those of subacute com- 
bined degeneration, occur with spastic or flaccid paralysis, and 
increase or loss of the tendon reflexes. 

Diagnosis , — This rests mainly on recognition of the rash, 
which in most cases is typical. Sprue is distinguished by the 
characteristic bulky and fatty stools. 

Treatment , — good mixed diet with the addition of yeast, 
and with plenty of fresh fruit and green vegetables will frequently 
effect a cure by itself. 

Administration of nicotinic acid in 50 mg. or larger doses 
after meals, a daily dosage up to 500 mg. being given, is 
usually rapidly effective. But the cure will ^ot be permanent, 
even if the nicotinic acid is continued, unless the general 
deficiency of the vitamin B complex is given adequate attention. 


SCURVY 

Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid). -This substance is water-soluble, 
and is rapidly destroyed by heat when in alkaline solution. 
It is present in all fresh fruits and vegetables, especially lemons, 



334 


DISEASES OP METABOLISM 

oranges, and tomatoes. Although potatoes are not very rich 
in vitamin C, they supply a very large part of the daily require- 
ment wherever they form a staple food owing to the large 
quantity consumed. In recent years good results have been 
claimed for the treatment of many diverse conditions with 
ascorbic acid, but little conclusive evidence has been produced 
to support most of these claims. Gross deficiency of vitamin C 
results in scurvy and deficient wound healing, but all the evidence 
tends to show that a patient has to be almost scorbutic before 
any lack of wound healing is revealed. 

Scurvy has been one of the great scourges of armies in the 
field, and it was the dread of seamen on long voyages until the 
preventive qualities of lemons were discovered. At the present 
time the disease is rare in adults, but it is still relatively common 
in infants in whom it produces a rather different clinical picture, 
which is described as infantile scurvy, or Barlow’s disease 
{vide p. 234). 

Pathology. — The most marked feature of the disease is a 
tendency to haemorrhage, so that extravasation of blood and 
petechial haemorrhages may be found in any part of the body. 
This haemorrhagic tendency is associated with a loss of and an 
inability to re-form intercellular matrix. 

Symptoms. — The onset of scurvy is usually insidious, with 
pallor, lassitude, and dyspnoea as early 83 miptoms. If the 
dietetic deficiency is not corrected, more characteristic symptoms 
develop. The most striking of these is the condition of the gums, 
which become congested and spongy, and bleed readily. As 
the disease progresses the swollen gums may almost completely 
envelop the teeth, which become loose, and may ultimately 
fall out. It should be noted that the gums of edentulous 
scorbutic patients usually remain normal. At the same time 
petecliial spots appear on the skin, particularly on the legs, 
together with larger ecchymoses. Sometimes hjcmorrhage 
takes place in the substance of a muscle producing a hard 
brawny swelling, tender to the touch. Other manifestations 
of the haemorrhagic tendency are sub-periosteal haemorrhages, 
epistaxis, haematuria, and sometimes cerebral haemorrhage. 
Uncomplicated scurvy is apyrexial, but sufferers from it are 
very Kable to intercurrent infections and frequently die of 
pneumonia. In the later stages there are oedema of the legs 
and sometimes effusions in the pleura and pericardium. 

Diagnosis. — ^In the presence of many cases, diagnosis is 
easy, but with sporadic cases there may be confusion with 
puipura haemorrhagica. In cases of doubt a blood platelet 
count may be helpM, as in scurvy the count is high, while in 



SCURVY 336 

J)urpura it is often very low. The therapeutic test is also a 
valuable aid in diagnosis, for a patient with scurvy, when put 
on a diet rich in vitamin C, shows a rapid improvement. 

Prophylaxis and Treatment. — ^Where there is no poverty and 
a mixed diet is eaten there is little risk of scurvy among adults. 
Where it is impossible to get suitable food, a ration of lemon 
juice is an effective prophylactic. Scurvy sometimes occurs 
in patients on a restricted diet, such as those on strict dietary 
treatment for peptic ulcer. 

The symptoms disappear with marvellous rapidity when 
the patient is put on a diet with an ample surplus of fresh fruit, 
particularly oranges and lemons, fresh milk, cabbage, salads, 
tomatoes, and potatoes. The vitamin is destroyed by alkalis 
and the use of soda in cooking green vegetables must be for- 
bidden. Scurvy can be rapidly got imder control by giving 
ascorbic acid either by mouth (150 to 300 mg. daily) or by 
injections in amounts up to 500 mg. in urgent cases. Some 
cases have, however, been reported which did not respond to 
the synthetic ascorbic acid, but recovered rapidly on orange 
juice. It is important always to attend to the diet, as probably 
all cases are deficient in other vitamins as well. 

Patients with scurvy should be kept in bed until marked 
improvement has taken place, in view of the risk of sudden 
syncope and heart failure, even oh slight exertion. For pain 
or restlessness morphia may be necessary. 

J. J. CONYBEARE. 
W. P. Stamm. 



DISEASES OF THE BLOOD, SPLEEN, 
LYMPHATIC GLANDS, AND RET- 
ICULO-ENDOTHELIAL SYSTEM 

DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 
Physiology 

T O understand many of the features presented by the 
diseases discussed in this section, it is essential to 
remember certain physiological points concerning the 
circulating blood, and the mechanism by which departures 
from the normal may occur. 

When interpreting blood counts, not only must we appreciate 
what may be c€dled “ normal variations,'* but also remember 
the most acceptable theories concerning the origin of the 
various cells in the blood. The red cells consist of a stroma 
or framework, composed chiefly of protein material, containing 
in its meshes haemoglobin. The cells are soft, flexible, and 
elastic, and can thus squeeze through apertures and channels 
narrower than themselves. They are non-nucleated, biconcave 
discs of about 7*4 /x average diameter, form about 50 per cent, 
of the total mass of the blood, and total in men about 5,000,000 
per cubic millimetre or slightly more, and in women about 
4,500,000. The total surface area of the corpuscles is about 
3,000 square metres, or 1,500 times the surface of the body 
itself — ^a point of some importance in facilitating oxygen 
interchange. In the adult the red cells are derived from the 
red bone marrow, in which tissue all the precursors of red cells 
are found. As will be seen later, the r^ cells, as seen in a 
blood film, may show abnormalities of the following types : 
(a) Shortage of iron intake or excessive loss (hsemorrhage) may 
cause the cells to be poorly filled with hsemoglobin, and appear 
pale and somewhat irregular in shape. These pale cells have 
a low colour index, t.s., the amount of haemoglobin per cell 
is below normal, the normal cell having an index of unity. 

336 



DISEASES OF TfiE BLOOD 33? 

(6) A sudden call for large numbers of new cells, as after a 
large haBmorrhage, may result in the turning into the circulation 
of many polychromatic or yoimg cells (reticulocytes), or cells 
with small round nuclei (normoblasts), which would otherwise 
have h^d time to develop normally before being sent out. 

(c) Some pathological process directly affecting the bone 
marrow (as in pernicious anaemia, leukaemia, etc.) may prevent 
the proper maturation of the reds, which therefore appear in 
the circulation in their quite immature forms (megaloblasts, 
erythroblasts, etc.). To determine the nature of the failure 
direct films of the bone-marrow may be obtained by puncture 
at sternal biopsy. According to Israels the formation of 
megaloblasts, deformed normoblasts and pale microcytes, or 
excessive or absent normoblast production can then be seen 
corresponding to the megalocytic, iron-deficiency, post-haemor- 
rhagic, aplastic and other types of anaemia described later. 

(d) Some toxic substance may be actually taken up by the red 
cell and produce a characteristic microscopical appearance, 
e.g,, the punctate ba.sophilia of lead -poisoning. 

Two types of white cell are eaaily distinguished, namely, 
the granulocytes containing granules in their cytoplasm 
(neutrophil pol;yTnorph8, eosinophils, and basophils) and those 
without granules (lymphocytes). In the main, granulocytes 
are formed only in the bone marrow, and Ijunphocytes only in 
lymphatic tissue. Both these tissues form part of the reticulo- 
endothelial system of cells, and it is clear that any disturbance 
of this cell system, such as that which occurs in leukaemia, is 
especially liable to be accompanied by marked disturbance in 
the patient’s w^hite count. On the other hand, the more 
common departures of the white count from normal are in the 
nature of physiological responses of the tissues to abnormal 
stimuli. For example, the granulocytes which are mainly 
phagocytes show increased production in septic states, such as 
pneumonia, where cellular debris has to be removed from the 
tissues. Again, the increase in lymphocytes in tuberculous 
infection is simply an indication of the glandular h}"peractivity 
which is part of the natural defensive reaction. As in the case 
of the red cells, immature white cells raa}^ appear in the blood 
if there is a very sudden and vigorous call for any particular 
type. This is specially well seen in the case of the granulocytes 
(polymorphs), where a satisfactory defensive response results 
in the appearance of many “young” forms in the circulating 
blood. the younger the cell the fewer the lobes seen in 
its nucleus, the nature of the response can be recorded as the 
Ameth count, which is a percentage record of the number 
zz 



338 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

of cells having one to five lobes to their nuclei. Normally, 
the greatest number have two, three, or four lobes. In a 
vigorous defensive leucocytosis the majority may have only 
two, while many yoimg forms with only a horse-shoe shaped, 
unlobed nucleus will occur. This change in predominance is 
described, according to the customary method of ffecording 
(Ameth count), as the “ shift to the left.’* In the case of 
deficient white-cell production, such as occurs in pernicious and 
aplastic anaBmias, the predominant cell may be older and 
therefore possess more nuclear lobes, in which case the count 
shows a “ shift to the right.” 

The frankly immature cells, namely, myeloblasts and 
myelocytes, appear with any frequency in the circulating 
blood only when there is gross disturbance, general or local, 
of some part of the blood-forming system. Their appearance 
represents failure in function and in proper maturation, and 
never occurs as a physiological response to external stimuli. 

One other cellular element in the blood remains to be 
considered, namely, the platelets. Probably they also arise 
from the bone marrow during the development and differentia- 
tion of the megakaryocytes. It is, however, clear that they 
are intimately concern^ with coagulation. Their function 
appears to be, however, concerned not with the production 
of the fibrin clot as such, but with its proper contraction and 
firmness after the fibrin has been deposited. Without a full 
quota of platelets, coagulation of the blood is not efficient in 
closing breaches, traumatic or toxic, in the capillary walls. 
Normally the blood contains about 250,000 platelets per cubic 
millimetre. Great increases above this level, such as may 
occur in puerperal states, are found to cause a liability to throm- 
bosis, whereas falls to about 40,000 per cubic milhmetre result in 
a liability to purpura and extensive bruising from quite trivial 
trauma. At about 15,000 per cubic millimetre there is usually a 
tendency to spontaneous haemorrhage from mucous membranes. 

In this connection determination of the bleeding time 
and dotting time may be of the greatest importance. 
The bleeding time is that taken for oozing to cease from a 
sharp single finger-prick made with a Hagedom cutting needle. 
The drops of blood are blotted off the finger at one-quarter 
minute intervals without touching the skin. According to the 
depth of the prick, bleeding will cease in a normal person in 
three to four minutes. Variations depend upon the rate of 
clot retraction as well as upon actual coagulation. Thus when 
there is a platelet shortage, formation and fixation of an 
efficient clot is delayed, and therefore the bleeding time is 



339 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

prolonged, although the rate at which the first actual coagulum 
forms may be normal. To determine the clotting time the most 
satisfactory method is that of Laidlaw. By this method 
the normal clotting time is three to four minutes. 

A physical property of drawn blood, observations of which 
may be helpful clinically, is the sedimentation rate of the red 
cells. When a column of freshly collected, citrated blood is 
set up, the raie, at which the red cells sink down to form a 
compact layer depends upon variations in the plasma proteins, 
which are in turn related to the presence or absence of tissue 
breakdown proceeding in the body. The more active the tissue 
change, the greater the rate of fall of the red cells, and the test 
becomes a delicate indirect method of detecting the activity 
or quiescence of inflammatory processes not readily observable 
by direct means. The normal blood sedimentation rate is 
1 to 8 mm. in one hour. 

The subject of blood groups is discussed later in connection 
with blood transfusion. 

The specific gravity of blood is normally about 1,059. In 
anasmia this figure may be much lower ; for example, a haemo- 
globin of 30 per cent, is usually associated with a specific gravity 
of about 1,035. In collapse, or conditions in which great loss 
of fluid occurs, e.g,, cholera, a marked rise may be noted. 

Normal red cells can resist the osmotic pressure set up 
when they are immersed in saline of 0-45 per cent., isotonic 
saline being 0*9 per cent., and are not laked until they are 
immersed in weaker saline solutions. The highest dilution 
which any particular cells can resist is taken as a measure 
of their fragility, a determination of great diagnostic value in 
acholuric jaundice, in which condition the cells are unusually 
fragile and therefore tend to haemolyse while in circulation, 
thus producing jaundice. 

The average quantity of haemoglobin in the blood of healthy 
adult males is about 16-2 mg. per 100 c.c. The average red 
cell count in the normal male is actually nearer to 5,500,000 
than 6,000,000 per cubic millimetre, and the higher figure 
must, for normal red cells, therefore cbrrespond to about 
16*2 mg. of haemoglobin per 100 c.c. If we take, as is usual, 
only 5,000,000 per cubic millimetre as the “ normal,” then for 
purposes of estimating the colour index (vide p. 355), which is 

H»mogIoto percer^ and represents the relative amount of 
Red cell percentage 

heemoglobin per cell, the “ normal ” or 100 per cent, hsemo- 
globin figure as marked on the hsemoglobinometer scale should 
correspond to only about 14*5 mg. of hsemoglobin per 100 c.c. 



338 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

of cells having one to five lobes to their nuclei. Normally, 
the greatest number have two, three, or four lobes. In a 
vigorous defensive leucocytosis the majority may have only 
two, while many young forms with only a horse-shoe shaped, 
unlobed nucleus will occur. This change in predominance is 
described, according to the customary method of tfecording 
(Ameth count), as the “ shift to the left.” In the case of 
deficient white-cell production, such as occurs in pernicious and 
aplastic ansemias, the predominant cell may be older and 
therefore possess more nuclear lobes, in which case the count 
shows a “ shift to the right.” 

The frankly immature cells, namely, myeloblasts and 
myelocjftes, appear with any frequency in the circulating 
blood only when there is gross disturbance, general or local, 
of some part of the blood-forming system. Their appearance 
represents failure in function and in proper maturation, and 
never occurs as a physiological response to external stimuli. 

One other cellular element in the blood remains to be 
considered, namely, the platelets. Probably they also arise 
from the bone marrow during the development and differentia- 
tion of the megakaryocytes. It is, however, clear that they 
are intimately concerned with coagulation. Their function 
appears to be, however, concerned not with the production 
of the fibrin clot as such, but with its proper contraction and 
firmness after the fibrin has been deposited. Without a full 
quota of platelets, coagulation of the blood is not efficient in 
closing breaches, traumatic or toxic, in the capillary walls. 
Normally the blood contains about 250,000 platelets per cubic 
millimetre. Great increases above this level, such as may 
occur in puerperal states, are found to cause a liability to throm- 
bosis, whereas falls to about 40,000 per cubic millimetre result in 
a liability to purpura and extensive bruising from quite trivial 
trauma. At about 15,000 per cubic millimetre there is usually a 
tendency to spontaneous haemorrhage from mucous membranes. 

In this connection determination of the bleediiig time 
and dotting time may be of the greatest importance. 
The bleeding time is that taken for oozing to cease from a 
sharp single finger-prick made with a Hagedom cutting needle. 
The drops of blood are blotted off the finger at one-quarter 
minute intervals without touching the skin. According to the 
depth of the prick, bleeding will cease in a normal person in 
thi^ to four minutes. Variations depend upon the rate of 
clot retraction as well as upon actual coagulation. Thus when 
there is a platelet shortage, formation and fixation of an 
efficient clot is delayed, and therefore the bleeding time is 



339 


DISEASES OP THE BLOOD 


prolonged, although the rate at which the first actual coagulum 
forms may be normal. To determine the clotting time the most 
satisfactory method is that of Laidlaw. By this method 
the normal clotting time is three to four minutes. 

A physical property of drawn blood, observations of which 
may be helpful clinically, is the sedimentation rate of the red 
cells. When a column of freshly collected, citrated blood is 
set up, the rate at which the red cells sink down to form a 
compact layer depends upon variations in the plasma proteins, 
which are m turn related to the presence or absence of tissue 
breakdown proceeding in the body. The more active the tissue 
change, the greater the rate of fall of the red cells, and the test 
becomes a delicate indirect method of detecting the activity 
or quiescence of inflammatory processes not readily observable 
by direct means. The normal blood sedimentation rate is 
1 to 8 mm. in one hour. 

The subject of blood groups is discussed later in connection 
with blood transfusion. 


The specific gravity of blood is normally about 1,059. In 
anssmia this figure may be much lower ; for example, a haemo- 
globin of 30 per cent, is usually associated with a specific gravity 
of about 1,035. In collapse, or conditions in which great loss 
of fluid occurs, e.g^., cholera, a marked rise may be noted. 

Normal red cells can resist the osmotic pressure set up 
when they are immersed in saline of 0*45 per cent., isotonic 
saline being 0-9 per cent., and are not laked until they are 
immersed in weaker saline solutions. The highest dilution 
which any particular cells can resist is taken as a measure 
of their fragility, a determination of great diagnostic value in 
acholuric jaundice, in which condition the cells are unusually 
fragile and therefore tend to hsemolyse while in circulation, 
thus producing jaimdice. 

The average quantity of haemoglobin in the blood of healthy 
adult males is about 16*2 mg. per 100 c.c. The average red 
cell count in the normal male is actually nearer to 5,500,000 
than 5,000,000 per cubic miUiinetre, and the higher figure 
must, for normal red cells, therefore correspond to about 
16*2 mg. of haemoglobin per 100 c.c. If we take, as is usual, 
only 5,000,000 per cubic millimetre as the “ normal,’’ then for 
purposes of estimating the colour index {vide p. 355), which is 


H emoglobin percentag e the lelative amount of 

Red cell percentage 

haemoglobin per ceO, the “ normal ” or 100 per cent, haemo- 
globin figure as marked on the haemoglobinometer scale should 
correspond to only about 14-6 mg. of haemoglobin per 100 c.c. 



340 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 


Unfortunately the absolute haemoglobin value to which the 
100 per cent, mark corresponds varies with the type of instru- 
ment. In the older Haldane carboxyhaemoglobin haemoglobin- 
ometer it is only 13*8 mg., in the more recent Sahli and Hellige 
acid haematin types it is about 14*7 mg. With the object of 
fixing a universal standard an oflSicial committee is now sitting. 
Meanwhile in making clinical haemoglobin estimations, it seems 
advisable to use an apparatus (one of the acid haematin t 3 rpe 8 ) 
in which the normal 100 per cent, reading is given when patient’s 
blood contains 14*5 to 14*7 mg. per 100 c.c. ^hen if the 
‘‘ normal ” red coimt is taken to be 6,000,000 per cubic milli- 
metre, the figure for the colour index will be truly representative, 
as it is meant to be, of the relative amoimt of haemoglobin per 
cell, 1*0 being the normal index. To determine the haemo- 
globin content of the blood with chemical accuracy, the best 
methods are based either upon estimation of the oxygen- 
carrying capacity or the iron percentage of the fresh blood. 

The average diameter of the red cells in films, normally about 
7*4 /X, is, together with the colour index, raised in megalocytic 
and reduced in microcytic anaemia. It may be determined 
either directly by Price-Jones projection methods or indirectly 
by halometer, a small halo resulting from the large cells and 
vice versa. 

Blood Transfusion 

Although the idea of blood transfusion originated many 
centuries ago, it is only during the last twenty years that 
transfusion of blood from one individual to another has become 
a relatively safe and simple procedure, lliis result is due to 
two discoveries : firstly, a knowledge of the blood groups in 
human blood ; secondly, the use of sodium citrate as an anti- 
coagulant. Without a knowledge of blood groups, transfusion 
was at best a hazardous operation, which might as readily 
result in the death of the patient as in the amelioration of his 
symptoms. Without citrate methods the technique of the 
operation was necessarily difficult owing to the risk of clotting. 

Blood Gfroups. — It has long been known that if the blood of 
one species of animal is injected into the circulation of another 
the injected corpuscles are rapidly destroyed and haemoglobin 
appears in the blood and urine. The existence of “ blood 
groups ” in human beings was first shown by Landsteiner in 
1901. In 1907 Jansky carried matters a stage further by 
describing four distinct groups. Two years later Moss made 
similar observations and published his classification of bloods 
into arbitrarily named Groups I. to IV. The Moss grouping 



BLOOD TRANSFUSION 


341 


was widely used for many years, but should now be superseded 
by the International (A, B, 0) Classification which is at last 
being universally adopted. These ‘‘ four group ’’ classifications 
depend upon the fact that all the red cells of any particular 
person carry both, one, or neither of two agglutinogens A and B, 
making four possibilities, AB, A, B, and O. Contact between 
cells carrying A or B and any serum containing the correspond- 
ing agglutinins, termed respectively a and p, will result in 
agglutination of the cells. The blood of any individual cannot 
contain both agglutinogen and corresponding agglutinin, 
otherwise auto-agglutination would occur. Four stable mix- 
tures may therefore be met with, namely, AB-fo, A-f jS, B-fa, 
and O-f-ajS. These are the four main blood groups which for 
simplicity are in the International Classification named by 
their cell agglutinogens only. For bloods from different 
individuals to be completely compatible they must belong to 
the same group. Any other combination allows at least some 
of the cells to come in contact with their specific agglutinin. 
But in transfusion practice, although it is essential that the 
in-going cells of the donor shall not be clumped by the recipient’s 
serum, the agglutinins in the donor’s serum are sufficiently 
diluted as they enter the recipient’s circulation to reduce their 
effect on his cells to negligible proportions. Therefore it is 
possible to use as donors not only persons of the same group as 
the patient but also persons whose blood is of a group having 
cells which will be unaffected by the agglutinins known to be 
present in the patient’s senxm. The table given on page 342 
will make the possibilities more clear. It indicates the result 
of contact between the cells of the possible donors and patients 
of different groups, and the relationship between the older 
Moss Groups and the modem International Classification. It 
also shows the percentage occurrence of the groups in Western 
Europe. As Group O cells contain no agglutinogen they 
cannot be affected by sera of any of the groups. Persons 
belonging to Group O are therefore ‘‘ universal donors ” and 
used for building up stored blood supplies. For Group A 
patients the donor must belong to Group A or Group O, for 
Group B patients the donor must belong to Group B or Group O, 
Group AB patients can receive from donor of any group, and 
Group O patients must have a Group 0 donor. 

Before transfusion, therefore, it is essential to know the 
group of both donor and recipient. The technique of grouping, 
using the ** four group ** classification, is simple. Fresh high- 
titre specimens of known Group A and Group B sera are re- 
quired, and can nowadays be obtained from the official serum 



342 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 


Moss 

Groups. 

International 

Classification. 

Percentage Occurrence. 

Rboipibnt’s Blood. 

Agglutinins in Serum. 

Agglutinogens 
in Cells. 

Agglutinins 
in Serum. 

0 

P 

a 

ap 

Agglutinogens in Cells. | 

AB 

A 

1 ^ 

0 

I. 

AB 

0 

7 

- 

+ 


+ 

II. 

A 

p 

40 


- 

1 + 

+ : 

III. 

B 

a 

10 

- 

[ -f- 



IV. 

0 

ap 

43 

1 

1 

- 

1 



Table showing the result of the cells of donors of the various groups being brought 
into contact with the sera of the four possible types of recipient. A plus sign 
implies agglutination of the donor’s cells, a minus sign the absence of agglutination. 
The relationship between the International and Moss Classihcations is shown, the 
percentage occurrence of the groups, and also the agglutinogen -agglutinin make-up 
of each variety of blood. 


laboratories. A little of the blood to be tested is collected from a 
finger-prick into a tube containing a small quantity of 3 per 
cent, sodium citrate. A drop of the cell suspension thus 
obtained is mixed on a perfectly clean glass shde with separate 
drops of the two known sera. The drops are kept under 
observation for ten to fifteen minutes, preferably at 37® C. 
incubator temperature, but this warming is not usually 
necessary. When agglutination of the cells occurs they clump 
together, the even emulsion taking on the appearance of coarse 
grains of red pepper lying in the clear serum. The change is 
readily seen with the naked eye when the slide is examined 
against a white background. By reference to the table it will 
be seen that should no agglutination occur with either serum, 
the cells tested are of Group O. If there is agglutination with 
both sera, the cells are of Group AB. If the cells agglutinate 
in serum A only they are of Group B. If they agglutinate 
m serum B only, they are of Group A. In recent years it has 
been found possible to divide this last group into Aj and A,. 
But this subdivision need not affect transfusion technique 
except in so far as occasional cases of Group A^B have a serum 
which agglutinates 0 cells and thus introduces a slight risk of 
untoward reaction if a universal 0 donor is used for an AB 
patient without preliminary cross-matching. In all cases of 



BLOOD TRANSFUSION 343 

doubt the M.R.C. Memorandum now advises a test-tube 
technique. In “ grouping ” a patient or donor both cells and 
serum are tested, so clothed and citrated blood samples are 
needed, also standard Anti-A and Anti-B sera as well as 5 per 
cent, suspensions of known A^, Ag, and B cells. In small tubes 
equal parts of the known and unknowm sera are separately 
mixed with equal parts of the known and unknown cell sus- 
pensions. All combinations are thus tested and grouping 
becomes certain. The tubes stand at room temperature for 
two hours and agglutination is read through a hand lens. Cross - 
matching follows similar lines, clotted and citrated blood 
being needed from both patient and donor. For satisfactory 
grouping tests it is essential that the samples of standard sera 
should be quite fresh or have been kept in the ice chest, because 
rapid deterioration takes place at room temperature. 

As already explained, the ideal donor for any particular case 
is an individual of the same group. In these circumstances the 
two bloods will ‘‘ cross -match ’’ perfectly. When the donor, 
according to preliminary grouping, is suitable but not of the 
same group as the patient, one should, by matching the donor’s 
cells against the patient’s serum, make quite sure that the 
ingoing cells will not be agglutinated in the recipient’s circula- 
tion. In some severe disorders of the blood and with all patients 
in whom it is undesirable to produce even the slightest reaction, 
it is advisable always to use a donor of the same group and 
one which cross-matches perfectly. Occasionally cases are 
met with, particularly those with very severe anaemia, whose 
red cells undergo auto-agglutination even in normal sahne. It 
is then necessary to perform the cross-matching tests at 37° C. 
Ill emergency and when the precise groups of patient and donor 
cannot be determined, the finding that the prospective donor’s 
cells are unaffected by the patient’s serum w^l justify the 
transfusion being undertaken. 

It is important to remember, while on the subject of blood 
groups, that in 1928 it was noted that one or both of two addi- 
tional agglutinogens, termed M and N, may be present in 
human red cells. The corresponding agglutinins are not, 
however, found in any natural human sera. Therefore, no 
account need be taken of the M and N factors when groupings 
or matchings are made for blood-transfusion purposes. But 
specific M and N agglutinating sera can be made by animal 
inoculation, and therefore by use of such sera, as well as known 
A and B human sera, twelve instead of four blood groups can 
be identified and termed AM, AN, AMN, BM, BN, BMN, OM, 
ON, OMN, ABM, ABN, and ABMN. This wider differentiation 



344 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

of blood samples has its obvious application in medico-l^al 
work, but is unnecessary as a preliminary to blood transfusion. 

The corpuscles of about 85 per cent, human beings also 
contain another factor knovm as rIiosus (Rh.), but normally 
human plasma contains no anti-Rh. agglutinins. Consequently 
haemolysis will not occur when Rh. positive blood is transferred 
into a Rh. negative recipient. There is, however, evidence 
that w hen such a transfusion has been carried out there may 
be a slow formation of anti-Rh. agglutinin in the recipient. 
If after a long interval a further transfusion from a Rh. positive 
donor is given this anti-Rh. agglutinin may produce serious 
hocmolysis. It is probable that this is the explanation of some 
of the severe, sometimes fatal, reactions which occur when a 
patient has more than one transfusion, especially if an interval 
of years has elapsed betw een transfusions . Consequently patients 
who liave had previous transfusions more than a year before 
should be transfused only with blood from a Rh. negative donor. 
In all such repeat transfusions it is wise to have the bloods of 
donors and recipients cross-matched by experts. The occasional 
appearance of anti-Rh. in the serum of a Rh. -negative mother 
when she carries a Rh. j>ositive foetus accounts for many of the 
cases of erythroblastosis foetalis (t^ide p. 225). 

After any transfusion, even with a compatible blood, there 
is sometimes a general reaction with pjTexia aJad rigors, but 
if an incompatible group is employed there is a grave risk of 
serious symptoms. The recipient becomes rapidly distressed 
and dyspnoeic, suffers from precordial pain, and the pulse 
becomes first slow and then rapid and thready ; the temperature 
rises and rigors may occur ; the urine is diminished in amount, 
and sometimes hacmoglobinuria or suppression may occur. 
Death may take place rapidly, often as the result of uraemia 
and deposition of altered haemoglobin in the renal tubules. 
If, before transfusion, the patient is given sufficient alkali 
by the mouth to render the urine alkaline, this deposition of 
pigment in the renal parenchyma is, in event of incompatibility, 
largely prevented. The incidence of pyrexia and rigors can 
be decidedly reduced by (a) making sure that the blood is 
kept warm, its temperature never falling below 35° C. ; (6) the 
use of closed apparatus for transfusion and accessory solutions 
which are absolutely free from living or dead bacteria and all 
inorganic particles ; and (c) giving the patient ephedrine J gr. 
twenty minutes before transfusion. 

In addition to careful attention to grouping, it is im- 
portant to ascertain that the donor is not suffering from 
any communicable illness such as syphilis, malaria, or 



BLOOD TRANSFUSION 345 

fevers in the incubation period. Allergic donors are also 
undesirable. 

The indications for transfusion are dealt with in the sections 
on various diseases, but they may be given here in tabular form. 

1. Haemorrhage and shock, e.flr., hi severe trauma, operations, 
or loss of blood from hsematemesis or haemoptysis. 

2. Blood diseases, e.gr., pernicious anaemia, splenic amaemia, 
leukaemia, icterus gravis neonatorum. 

3. Haemophilia and purpura, in which it is hoped that the 
transfused blood may bring about cessation of haemorrhage. 

4. Septicaemia and pyaemia. 

6. Before operations upon anaemic patients. 

Stored Blood. — War conditions have directed increased 
attention to storing of blood for use in great emergency. Whole, 
citrated blood collected from the donor with absolute asepsis 
into closed containers and stored at 2° to 4*^ C. can be used 
without risk of undue reaction untU about fourteen days after 
collection. Shaking must be avoided. If the blood is to be 
used within two or three days of collection, 1 part of 3*8 per 
cent, sodium citrate is needed for each 9 parts of blood. For 
longer storage the mixture is rather more dilute and a little 
glucose is added. Maizels has shown that although the chemistry 
of stored cells differs from that of fresh, tliey become recon- 
ditioned in the patient’s circulation within twenty-four hours 
of transfusion. But the longer the storage the more cells 
l>ecome changed beyond recovc^ry and the more liable is trans- 
fusion to be followed by reactions. Up to ten days’ storage, 
how^ever, it may be assumed that all the transfused cells will 
become reconditioned. The leucocytes of stored blood rapidly 
die, and the platelets are lost by adhering to the sides of the 
container. Fresh blood should therefore be used for transfusing 
cases showing a poor white cell count and those suffering 
from active sepsis, acute hauuolytic anaemias, or purpura. 
For other types of anaemia stored blood has satisfactory replace- 
ment value. Whatever antibodies are present are relatively 
well preserved and are transferred during transfusion. 

The disadvantages of Group O blood for universal transfusion 
are few% but occasionally 0 plasma may be of exceptionally 
high titre and, by agglutinating the cells of patients of groups 
other than O, cause reactions. Except in the case of very 
ansemic patients, whose cells must at all costs he protected, 
this phenomenon is rarely of importance, but whenever the red 
count is very low it is advisable to transfuse only with blood 
of the same group. This also applies to the use of plasma or 
serum. 



346 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 


During storage the cells settle after two days into a compact 
layer surmounted by relatively clear plasma. As red cell 
deterioration and haemolysis begin, a pint zone appears in the 
lower part of the plasma and rises steadily, but this zone should 
not be very noticeable until about the eighth day onwards. 
Gross haemolysis suggests infection of the blood. If the blood 
is ever allowed to freeze, it may cause severe reactions. Although 
stored blood should be very slowly warmed before transfusion, 
overheating above 40° C. causes very rapid haemolysis and 
extremely severe, sometimes fatal, reactions. 

For real emergencies a supply of stored blood is useful, but 
the increased use of plasma in the treatment of traumatic shock 
has made it more possible to rely on a panel of ready-grouped 
donors, when whole-blood transfusion is necessary, i.c., when 
the patient is anaemic or actual haemorrhage has occurred. 

Plasma Transfusion. — Systematic storage of citrated blood 
provides opportunity to collect and store for even longer 
periods large quantities of plasma. This is easily pipetted 
from above the layer of cells, being withdrawn before any 
appreciable haemolysis has taken place. Usually samples 
from several bottles are pooled. Drip transfusion of plasma is 
found to be particularly valuable when the patient is suffering 
from shock without haemorrhage. The effect is to counteract 
the fall in plasma proteins, to restore the blood volume, and 
to help to raise the systolic blood pressure to the region of 
100 mm. of Hg. If plasma transfusion is going to be per- 
manently effective in this respect, marked clinical improvement 
will have taken place by the time 2 or 3 pints have been run in. 
If the patient’s condition is even then not maintained, it is 
unlikely to be permanently benefited by further transfusion. 
The giving of very large volumes of Group 0 plasma is not 
without risk because, as noted in the previous section, its 
agglutinin content may be high. Group O plasma contains 
both agglutim’ns a and which in contact with any cells of 
groups other than O will agglutinate them rapidly. Using 
moderate quantities of pooled plasma this effect is rarely of 
clinical significance unless the patient’s red count is excep- 
tionally low, but red cell destruction can be serious if really 
large volumes of high titre O plasma are given to patients of 
other groups. To avoid administration of the agglutinins in 
Group 0 plasma, it may be left in contact for some days with 
red cells carrying the agglutininogens A and B and its agglutinins 
win then be to a large extent absorbed. The agglutinin-free 
plasma can then be stored in the usual way. The ideal plasma 
for transfusion is, of course, Group AB, wWch is agglutinin-free 



PLASMA AND SERUM TRANSFUSION 


347 


from the outset, but this unfortunately is the rarest group. 
Any plasma collected with strict asei)sis may be stored wet for 
very long periods, although in the cold it tends to deposit fibrin 
gradually and requires, with the attendant risk of contamina- 
tion, filtering at intervals. Thus it is customary to store plasma 
at room temperature under which conditions, although storage 
cannot be quite so long, fibrin deposit is much less marked. 

Serum Translusion.— Stored serum could be used for all the 
purposes indicated above in connection with plasma, but 
various practical considerations make the latter easier to 
handle and distribute. Serum, like plasma, goes flaky after 
long storage, and both should, during intravenous administra- 
tion, always be passed through a monel metal gauze or a gas 
mantle filter, as suggested by Maizels. 

Desiccation o! Serum and Plasma. — Although serum and 
plasma can be stored wet for very long periods, drying in 
vac-uo at low temperatures is the only means of ensuring really 
permanent preparations. Another great advantage possessed 
by the dried products is the enormous reduction in volume and 
the ease with which they can therefore be transported great 
distances. Before use, only simple redissolving in sterile water is 
required. Under active service conditions the dried products 
have therefore obvious advantages, but for civil hospitals they 
are less necessary. The transport question does not arise, 
time and some trouble are involved in redissolving the dried 
products, and blood collection is graded to the purely local 
needs and very long storage is never necessary. 

Transfusion of Red Cells Alone. — If blood collected as for 
storage (citrate and glucose) is left for two to five days in the 
cold until the red cells have settled into a compact layer, the 
plasma may be pipetted off to within one-quarter of an inch of 
the upper level of the cells. These can then be transfused alone. 
Administration should follow separation within twenty-four 
hours in case the blood has been infected during removal of 
the plasma. For the same reason the cells should be kept cold 
until just before use. The advantages which may lie in the 
transfusion of these “ packed cells ” are that much oxygen- 
carrying capacity is provided in small bulk, cardiac strain may 
be less and any agglutinating action of the Group 0 plasma 
upon the patient’s cells is largely removed. 

Method of Blood or Plasma Transfusion.— The technique 
of transfusion can be learnt only by experience. The eitrated 
blood or plasma may, provided it is protected throughout 
from contamination by dust or bacteria, be run into the 
recipient’s vein at leisure by any method employing gravity or 



348 DISEASES OP THE BLOOD 

syringe pressure. If the citrate is an absolutely pure product, 
it appears to produce no ill-effects. The essential points 
concerning grouping, temperature control, rate, and reactions 
have been considered in earlier sections. As regards method, 
the gravity apparatus issued for Service and E.M.S. emergency 
work is very valuable owing to its extreme simplicity, but 
with difficult veins or those of young children, methods in 
which the operator has greater personal control, such as the 
two-way syringe or small rotary pump methods, are more 
reliable and better adaptable to difficult clinical conditions. 
Also where large volumes are to be given very slowly by drip 
over long periods it will be found better to use, when possible, 
a more re^ed apparatus than that now issued for emergencies. 
For details of these methods the reader should refer to works 
devoted to actual technique. 

As regards the rate of transfusion, the first pint, whether 
blood, plasma, or serum, may be given relatively quickly — 
about twenty minutes — but thereafter the rate should be reduced 
to one drip per second or even slower. 


ANiEMIA 

A diagnosis of ** anaemia ” is one that is often too readily 
made by the patient and sometimes by the medical attendant. 
It must be remembered that too much rehance must not be 
placed upon the patient's colour, for it is not unusual to find 
persons with a pretematurally pale complexion whose blood, 
as proved by estimation of the haemoglobin, shows no evidence 
of anaemia. The best clinical indication of anaemia is pallor 
of the conjunctivae, the nail beds, and of the palms of the 
hands. Needless to say, before instituting treatment for 
anaemia, a careful blood examination is essential. 

Classification of Anssmia. — Anaemia may be due to loss or 
increased destruction of blood, or it may result from intcrfeionce 
with the production of red cells. The foUowing classification 
of the more common types of anaemia may be adopted. 

1. Anaemia due to loss of blood or increased blood 
destruction. 

(a) Haemorrhage, acute or chronic. 

{b) Abnormal haemolysis ; this includes acholuric 
jaundice, sickle-celled anaemia, and the acute 
haemolytic anaemia of Lederer. Haemolysis also 
occurs in malaria, blackwater fever, and some* 
times in septicaemias. 



ACHOLURIC JAUNDICE 349 

2. Aneemia due to interference with normal blood formation. 

(a) Toxic or infective processes, c.^., lead-poisoning, 
nephritis, growths, acute or chronic infections. 

(d) Deficiency anaemias : pernicious anaemia, simple 
achlorhydric anaemia, and perhaps chlorosis. 

Obviously in any individual patient more than one factor 
may be producing anaemia ; thus carcinoma ventriculi may 
render the patient anaemic by continued loss of small amounts 
of blood, and also by its depressant effects on the bone marrow 
and the reduced production of the gastric haemopoietic factor. 
The term “ secondary ” is often applied to any form of anaemia 
in which the colour index is low, but it is desirable to abandon 
this in favour of the term “microcytic” or “hypochromic,” 
indicating that the red cells are smaller than normal and 
contain less haemoglobin in contrast with the “ megalocj’tic ” 
or “ hyperchromic ” types in which the cells are on the 
average larger than normal and contain more haemoglobin. 
In anaemias resulting from simple aplasia of blood-forming 
tissues, the term ‘‘ normocytic ” may be applied. 

AnJEMIA due to HiEMOBRHAGB 

Very severe anaemia may result from either a single severe 
haemorrhage, or from long-continued loss of smaller amounts 
of blood. As a rule the diagnosis is obvious, but it is important 
to bear in mind that bleeding from piles or from the uterus 
may produce a severe anaemia, though the amount of blood 
lost at any one time may not be very great. Treatment must 
be directed to the cure of the underlying condition, though 
in severe cases blood transfusion may be required to tide over 
a critical condition. Administration of iron (ride p. 3G0) 
accelerates the regeneration of the blood. 


ACHOLURIC JAUNDICE 

This condition is also sometimes known as Chronic Haemo- 
lytic Jaundice. It occurs in a familial form, but there is also 
an acquired haemolytic jaundice in adults. How far these two 
t 5 rpe 8 are related remains \mcortain. 

In both forms of acholuric jaundice the fragility of the red 
cells is usually increased, but more obviously in the familial 
cases. Normal red cells l^gin to haemolyse in a saline solution 
of 0-46 per cent,, and haemolysis is complete in a 0*3 per cent. 



350 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 


solution. In acholuric jaundice the corresponding figures are 
0-6 per cent, and 0*40 per cent. In acholuric jaundice the 
increased fragility of the corpuscles leads to their premature 
destruction, and the liberated hsBmoglobin is transformed into 
bilirubin and jaundice results. The main site for the destruction 
of corpuscles is the spleen. There is an excess of urobilin in 
the urine, but no bile. In some cases of the disease, particularly 
in its acquired form, there may be no evidence of increased 
fragility, as judged by testing with saline solutions, but in 
some of these the fragile nature of the cells may be demon- 
strated by washing the cells completely firee of serum before 
applying the test. 

Symptoms. — In the familial form of the disease jaundice 
may be first noted in infancy or childhood. The spleen is 
much enlarged. The ansemia is only of moderate degree and 
gives a false appearance of microc^^bosis because of the spherical 
shape of the red cells in acholuric jaundice (spherocytosis). 
The symptoms are often intermittent, and the general health 
may remain satisfactory. Exacerbations occur in which the 
patient becomes more obviously jaundiced and anaemic, and 
during these periods there may be some pyrexia, with petechial 
haemorrhages and ecchymoses. 

In the acquired type, which starts in adult fife, the anaemia 
is more severe and the jaundice less striking. 

In both forms of acholuric jaundice the reticulocytes are 
increased, particularly in the acquired type, to 15 per cent, or 
higher, indicating active generation of new red cells to replace 
those lost by haemolysis. The indirect van den Bergh reaction 
is positive, very markedly so during the active phases, owing 
to the haemolysis, and pigment stones may form in the biliary 
tract and give rise to bUiary colic. The leucocyte coimt is 
usually increased during exacerbations. 

Diagnosis. — Acholuric jaundice may be mistaken for 
pernicious anaemia. In the latter condition, however, there is 
diminished rather than increased fragility and the blood 
picture is megalocyi;ic, in contrast to the low colour index in 
acholuric jaundice. Moreover, the spleen is rarely as largo in 
pernicious anaemia as in acholuric jaundice. 

Treatment. — In some of the familial cases the 83 anptoms are 
so slight that no treatment is needed. In both types of the 
disease splenectomy usually produces remarkably good results. 
Soon after the operation ^e fragility is often diminished, 
but later the condition of increased fragility may reappear, 
although the patient no longer suffers from the symptoms 
of the disease. 



PERNICIOUS ANiEMIA 


351 


Sickle-celled Aneemia. — This is a familial and hereditary 
disease found only in negroes. There is intermittent fever and 
severe hsemolytic anaemia, which ultimately proves fatal. 
Large numbers of the red cells are sickle-shaped. No treatment 
is effective. 

Acute Haemolytic Anaemia ot Lederer. — Nothing is known 
of the aetiology of this rare condition, which usually occurs in 
adolescence. The onset is sudden and the degree of anaemia 
increases rapidly. The temperature is raised and haemo- 
globinuria or slight jaundice may occur. There is often a 
leucocytosis with myelocytes or myeloblasts simulating acute 
leukaemia. Transfusion is often successful and this may help 
to differentiate the condition from leukaemia. Acute haemolytic 
anaemia may very rarely follow the administration of sulphon- 
amides. 


PERNICIOUS ANiEMIA 

( Addison's Ancsmia) 

Addison, in 1849, described by the term “ idiopathic 
anaemia ” a condition of profound anaemia occurring without 
any obvious loss of blood. This- well-recognised clinical con- 
dition has since been generally known as pernicious anaemia. 
The disease occurs rather more commonly in males than in 
females, and is most likely to develop between thirty-five and 
sixty years of age. It is sometimes hereditary or familial. 

Morbid Anatomy. — There is little evidence of emaciation in 
comparison with the duration and severity of the anaemia. 
The post-mortem findings are characteristic. The skin is 
usually of a typical lemon-yellow tint, with occasionally a few 
petechial haemorrhages on the lower limbs. The muscles are 
intensely red, while the subcutaneous fat is of a bright yellow 
colour. The heart is markedly flabby, with much fatty infiltra- 
tion of the muscle ; on naked-eye examination this is best 
seen beneath the endocardium covering the musculi papillares 
of the left ventricle, the condition beihg usually termed 
“ tabby-cat striation.*’ The liver is often large and fatty,'' 
with a colour exactly that of cafe au lait. With potassium 
ferrocyanide and hydrochloric acid the liver turns a Prussian- 
blue colour, due to an excess of iron-containing hacmosiderin. 
This reaction is known as Perl’s test, and is usually also posi- 
tive in the kidneys and spleen. The latter organ is enlarged 
in a majority of the cases. The bone marrow in the shafts 
of the long bones is bright red in colour, and a smear of the 



352 


DISEASES OP THE BLOOD 


marrow shows numerous large nucleated red cells. The spinal 
cord appears normal on naked-eye inspection, but histological 
examination may show the changes chaj*acteristic of subacute 
combined degeneration. 

Pathology. — For effective maturation of the red cells in the 
bone-marrow an anti-anaemic principle is necessary. To 
produce this it has been shown by Castle that two factors are 
required : (i) an intrinsic factor (hsemopoietin), which is pro- 
duced by the gastric mucosa, especially that of the body of 
the stomach, at any rate in human beings. The intrinsic factor 
is thermolabile. (ii) An extrinsic factor, which is present in 
the protein of the food, especially in that of meat, or perhaps 
in the breakdown products of such proteins. The intrinsic 
and extrinsic factors are both necessary for the production 
of the ‘‘ anti-anaemic principle which after it has been stored 
in the liver is thermostable. This is formed by the interaction 
of the two factors and is absorbed from the small intestine 
into the blood, which carries it to the liver and other organs, 
where it is stored, particularly in the liver. Without the 
“ anti-anaemic principle ” the red cells in the lK)ne-marrow 
are incapable of normal maturation. In consequence of such 
impaired maturation the circulating red cells are larger than 
normal, and the anaemia produced is megalocytic and hyper- 
chromic. 

Megalocytic anaemia may result from (i) absence or in- 
suflBciency of the intrinsic factor ; (ii) insufficiency of extrinsic 
factor ; (iii) inabihty of the intestine to absorb the anti-anaemic 
principle formed by the two factors ; (iv) a failure of the 
storage mechanism in the liver ; (v) a failure of the bone- 
marrow to make effective use of the anti-anaeraic principle. 

By far the most frequent cause of megalocytic anaemia 
is the first, absence or insufficiency of the intrinsic factor, and 
this is the basis of the relatively common disease, pernicious 
anaemia. 

As has already been stated, the intrinsic factor is evolved 
in the gastric mucosa. If the intrinsic factor is absent or 
deficient the supply of anti-anaemic principle to the marrow 
is rendered deficient. In the {etiology of pernicious anaemia 
it is necessary to determine how the supply of intrinsic factor 
comes to be defective. In pernicious anaemia it has been 
shown that almost without exception there is a gastric achylia, 
in which there is no secretion of free hydrochloric acid even 
after stimulation by histamine {vide p. 399). Such an achylia 
may result from an hereditary defect in the stomach. Thus 
it is found that not infrequently the disease is familial and also 



t>Etl1sncI0US ANiEMIA 363 

that in a family where one member has pernicious anaemia 
others may show gastric achylia. Moreover, many patients 
who develop pernicious anaemia have been known to have 
been achylic for years before the anaemia develops. Nor does 
the achylia disappear during remissions of the anaemia, whether 
spontaneous or induced by liver treatment. It is clear, there- 
fore, that the achylia which is such a constant feature of per- 
nicious anaemia is not the result of the anaemia but is in some 
way related to its development. Yet there must be other 
factors necessary for the development of the disease besides 
achylia, for it is known that this anomaly is not uncommon, 
often without producing symptoms of any kind. It is probable 
that the functions of the gastric mucosa are threefold, the secre- 
tion of hydrochloric acid, of enzymes, and of the intrinsic factor. 
It is clear, therefore, that an inability of the mucosa to produce 
acid or even enzymes, though this may constitute an achylia, 
is insufficient to cause pernicious anaunia unless the intrinsic 
factor is also absent. 

Other factors apart from an inherent defect in the stomach 
may much more rarely produce achylia and pernicious anamia. 
Thus surgicfil removal of a large j)ortion of the stomach may 
occasionally be f()llo\^e(l by pernicious anamia. It may also 
result from damage to the mucosa by chronic gastritis or 
carcinoma. 

Megalocytic anaunia may also result from a deficiency in 
the extrinsic factor. This may be the underl 3 ung cause in the 
so-called tropical anamias, but it is doubtful whether it arises 
in non-tropical countries. A more frequent cause of megalo- 
cytic anaemia is failure of absorption of the anti-an^emic 
principle. This may occur with strictures of the intestine, 
usuallj^ tuberculous, or where abnonnal anatomical conditions 
have arisen, such as a gusti'o-colic fistula. It is also likel}" to 
explain the megalocy tic anaemia of sprue {inde p. 199), for in 
this disease absorption from the intestine is defective. 

Storage of the anti-anoemic principle may be ineffective in 
widespread disease of the liver, such as cirrhosis, thougli in 
such cases the aniemia is seldom severe in relation to other 
features of the disease. 

Anaemia similar in tyjK? to i>ernicious amemia has been 
described by Wilkinson and Israels which fails U) react to liver 
and is not associated with achj’^lia. The condition is termed 
achrestic anmnia. It is probably' due to an inability of the 
ha 3 mopoietic tissues to utilise ha)moiK)ietin. The disease is 
rare and usually fatal. 

Subacute combined degeneration of the cord is a frequent 

23 



S64 DISEASES OP THE BLOOD 

accompaniment of pernicious anaemia, and this condition may 
sometimes occur before anaemia becomes manifest. It is likely 
that the stomach secretes not only the intrinsic factor, which 
with the extrinsic factor produces the anti-anaemic substance, 
but also some other enzyme which is essential for the adequate 
nutrition of the nervous tissues. This hypothetical enzyme 
has been termed “ neuropoietin.” 

Sepsis, such as infected tonsils or teeth, diminishes the 
effectiveness of liver in the treatment of pernicious anaemia. 
Possibly sepsis may in itself have a depressant effect on the 
haemopoietic functions, tending to produce and maintain 
gastritis, or it may to some extent directly interfere with the 
absorption of the anti-anaemic substance. 

While there is no true haemolysis in pernicious anaemia, 
the van den Bergh test shows a positive indirect reaction. 
This is due to a failure of utilisation of the breakdown products 
of normal red cell destruction, and possibly the failure of 
excretion of these products owing to fatty changes in the liver. 

Symptoms. — The symptoms and signs fall into two main 
groups : those resulting from the profound anaemia and 
resembling those found in other anaemias, and those which are 
more or less characteristic of pernicious anaemia. In the 
former group are such symptoms as dyspnoea, muscular 
weakness, headaches, palpitation, anginal pain, and oedema of 
the ankles ; and among physical signs a systolic haemic murmur 
in the pulmonary' area. The symptoms and signs characteristic 
of the disease are as follows : — 

1. Skin . — The great majority of patients show a typical 
lemon-yellow tint, which, together with the positive indirect 
van den Bergh reaction, may disappear during remissions, but 
which is nearly always present at some stage of the disease. 
In addition, brown pigmentation is not uncommon. Rarely 
pigmentation may occur in the mouth. 

2. Oastro-intestinal Symptoms, — Vomiting, diarrhoea, and 
dyspepsia are common and may occur in the earlier stages 
before the anaemia is severe or even for years before it develops. 
Gastric achylia is an almost constant feature, not only during 
the more acute stages but also during remissions, but achlor- 
hydria due to chronic gastritis may sometimes disappear. The 
significance of this has already been discussed. The tongue 
is frequently red, smooth, and devoid of papillae, and the 
patient complains that it is very sore. In contrast to other 
anaemias, constipation is very unusual. 

3. Neurological Symptoms. — Subacute , combined degenera* 
tion of the cord is described on page 928. 



PERNICIOUS ANAEMIA 356 

4. Spleen. — ^This organ is palpable during life in at least 
half the oases, but it is rarely very large. 

6 . Pyrexia, — Most cases of untreated pernicious anaemia 
have a low, irregular pyrexia, which is often intermittent. 

6 . Eyes, — Retinal hamorrhages occur in severe cases. 

7, The Blood Picture, — ^The most characteristic feature of 
the blood is that the averatge size of the red cells is increased. 
Normal red cells average 7*4 ^ in diameter, while in pernicious 
anaemia this figure may be as high as 9*40 p, A similar blood 
picture is seen in other forms of macrocjrtic anaemia. These 
include pernicious anaemia of pregnancy, tropical nutritional 
anaemia, sprue and the anaemia due to Dibothriocephalus. 
The increased mean diameter of the red cells explains the high 
colour index which is nearly always foimd in the disease. 
By this term is meant the ratio between the haemoglobin 
percentage and the percentage of the red cell count as compared 
with theoretical normals of 100 per cent. Hb (14*7 mg. Hb per 
100 c.c, of blood) and 5,000,000 cells to the cubic millimetre 
(see p. 339). 

C.I. (colour mdex)_ 

Red corpuscle percentage 

For example, with a red cell count of 1,000,000 and a 

25 

haemoglobin percentage of 25, the coloiu* index= -=1-25, 

because 1,000,000 red cells represent 20 per cent, of the average 
normal count of 5,000,000. A colour index above unity indi- 
cates that the average size of the cells is above normal, while 
with a low colour index the cells may be of normal size with 
a diminished content of haemoglobin (hypochromic) or may 
be actually smaller than normal (microcytic). 

Although the average, size of the red cells is large, there are 
also many abnormally small cells, and the variation in size is 
termed anisocytoais. The cells are also irregular in shape, a 
condition known ais poikUocytosis. Basophil granules and 
“ steel ” blue staining of the cells occur, termed respectively 
punctate basophilia and polychrontasia. During the later stages 
in the disease, many nucleated cells appear in the peripheral 
circulation ; when of normal size these are described as 
normoblasts ; but laiger and extremely primitive forms, termed 
megaloblasts and erythr oblasts, may finally appear. Megaloblasts 
are rarely seen except in advanced cases of pernicious anaemia, 
and are not necessarily found in every case. 

The haemoglobin percentage may fall to under 20 per cent, 
and the red cell count below 1,000,000, but even in the earher 



356 


DISEASES OP THE BLOOD 

stages the nature of the ansemia is suggested by the megalo- 
cytosis, high colour index, and the positive indirect van den 
Bergh reaction. 

The leucocyte count is always low except in the presence 
of a secondary infection, and seldom rises above 5,000 cells 
to the cubic millimetre. The differential count shows a 
diminution in the polymorphonuclear cells, with a relative 
increase in the lymphocytes. The polymorphs show a “ shift 
to the right ” {vide p. 338). The blood platelets are usually 
reduced. 

Diagnosis. — In most cases the diagnosis can be made on 
clinical grounds, but a careful blood examination and the 
discovery of achlorhydria conlBrm the diagnosis. The disease 
with which pernicious anaemia is most likely to be confounded 
is carcinoma of the stomach. In the latter condition, however, 
the anaemia is usually of the microcytic type, with a low colour 
index, and although achlorhydria may be present there is often 
blood in the test meal, but in a few instances a pernicious type 
of anaemia has been knouu to develop. The presence of a 
palpable tumour, marked emaciation, and X-ray evidence will 
usually reveal the true diagnosis. The anaemia of sprue may 
exactly resemble that of pernicious anaemia, but the character 
of the stools and residence in the East will provide a clue. 
Severe secondary anaemias due to loss of blood present a com- 
pletely different clinical picture and rarely give rise to serious 
difficulty. In idiopathic hyjK)chroniic anaemia {vide p. 358) the 
blood picture is of the microcytic type and the condition 
reacts rapidly to treatment with iron. 

Treatment. — It has already been stated that the adminis- 
tration of liver is a specific in pernicious anaemia. At the present 
time manj^ extracts of liver suitable for intramuscular injection 
have been put on the market under trade names such as 
Anahaemin, Pernaemon, and Hepatex. The dosage of such 
preparations varies with the conc*entration of the particular 
extract, and they have entirely replaced the oral administration 
both of liver or liver extract. It has been found, however, 
that these highly purified extracts are often less efticacious 
than the cruder preparations of liver, when used in the treat- 
ment of other macrocytic anaemias, such as tropical nutritional 
anaemia. In this condition there is often a deficient diet, and 
marmite is often as effective as liver. 

Intramuscular injections have many advantages over oral 
administration ; firstly, they are very much cheaper than 
adequate amounts of liver given orally. Secondly, patients 
readily tire of eating liver and consequently may omit to do 



PERNICIOUS ANiEMIA 


357 


so, a cjourse which inevitably leads to relapse. Intravenous 
injection is usually both unnecessary and dangerous, as the 
extracts are difficult to purify and may produce profotmd 
shock if given intravenously. A few instances of acquired 
hypersensitivity to liver extract injections have been recorded ; 
they may be controlled by coincident injection of adrenalin 
or may disappear if the type of extract is changed. 

When the patient is severely anaemic, liver extract should 
be given daily by intramuscular injection, the dose varying 
from 2 to 6 c.c. according to the preparation employed. 
When the clinical condition has improved and the haemoglobin 
has risen to 50 per cent, the frequency of the injections can be 
cautiously cut down. When the haemoglobin has risen to 100 
per cent, the blood should be maintained at this level by in* 
jections at intervals of several weeks. It is important to stress 
to the patient that treatment must be continued for the rest 
of his life, otherwise relapse is certain. 

It is important to have the blood examined at least every 
two months after recovery from the anaemia. Otherwise the 
patient may develop insidiously a considerable degree of 
anaemia or subacute combined degeneration. If the haemo- 
globin falls, more intensive liver treatment is required. 

Striking changes in the blood occur with the institution of 
liver treatment, and the more anaemic the patient the more 
effective is the liver. The first indication that liver is 
producing an effect is the appearance of an increased 
number of reticulocytes in the blood. In the untreated 
patient with pernicious anaemia, reticulocytes (mde p. 337) 
seldom exceed 1 to 3 per cent, of the red cells. Within 
about five days of starting liver treatment the number of 
reticulocytes increases, and by about the tenth day of treat- 
ment they have usually risen to between 15 and 40 |>er cent. 
(k)ncurrently with the increase of reticulocyiies, or as it is often 
called a reticulocyte response, there is a rise in the percontage 
of haemoglobin and in the red cell count. After about the tenth 
day of treatment the reticulocytes begin to diminish in number, 
and after some weeks have returned to their normal figure. 
The haemoglobin and red count, on the other hand, continue 
to rise, and within about eight to ten weeks may have reached 
normal figures. During liver treatment the leucocyte count 
rises. The red cells become normal in size and shape and the 
colour index approximates to miity. 

With the changes in the blood there is a rapid improvement 
in the condition of the patient. The lemon-yellow tint of the 
skin disappears and the indirect van den Bergh test becomes 



368 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

negative. Weakness, breathlessness, and depression are replaced 
by a feeling of well-being and the appetite increases. Subjective 
symptoms due to subacute combined degeneration, such as 
numbness and tingling in fingers and toes, disappear, but 
when there are objective symptoms of structural nervous 
disease, such as extensor plantar responses, these are little 
affected by liver treatment, though there may be a remarkable 
improvement in the clinical condition (vide pT 930). 

Even though the patient may improve rapidly under the 
influence of liver, it is essential to insist upon adequate rest in 
bed, particularly when the percentage of haemoglobin has been 
below 30 per cent. The patient should not be allowed up until the 
haemoglobin reaches 70 per cent. As soon as he is sufficiently fit, 
any infective foci, such as teeth or tonsils, should be dealt with. 

Blood transfusion is now very rarely necessary in pernicious 
anaemia, and should only be employed if the patient is in extremis. 

Desiccated stomach may be given in addition to liver. 
Several commercial preparations of dried hog’s stomach are 
on the market under trade names, such as Pepsac and Ventri- 
culin. They are given by mouth in doses up to 1 oz. a day, 
and are said to be of special value in the treatment of subacute 
combined degeneration. 

Iron has no 8i>ecific effect on pernicious anaemia, but when 
the anaemia is severe it may be given (vide p. 360) for the 
manufacture of haemoglobin. 

Plenty of fresh air, sunshine, and a liberal mixed diet of 
adequate vitamin content should be ensured. 

Prognosis. — In the past pernicious anaemia justified its 
sinister name and was almost invariably fatal within a few 
years, though usually there were several remissions, either 
spontaneous or induct by transfusions. With liver treatment 
the outlook has entirely changed, and with proper care there 
would appear to be no reason why a patient with pernicious 
anaemia should not live an active and useful life for an indefinite 
period, provided adequate treatment with liver is continued. 


Idiopathic Hypochromic An^eota 

This form of anaemia, which is also sometimes described as 
Simple Achlorhydric Anaemia, is of frequent occurrence in 
women of middle age, and rarely, if ever, is found in males, 
iBtioIogy. — Idiopathic hypochromic anaemia is so called 
because the corpuscles contain less haemoglobin than normal. 
It is the result of a deficiency of iron, either owing to lack of 



IDIOPATHIC HYPOCHROMIC ANAEMIA 359 

iron in the diet or more often to imperfect absorption of the 
metal. Menorrhagia probably plays a part in its production. 
Achlorhydria, or at any rate extreme hypochlorhydria, is an 
almost constant finding, and it is probably owing to this that 
absorption of iron is defective. The condition is sometimes 
familial and examples of pernicious anaemia and idiopathic 
hypochromic anaemia may be found in a single family. Probably 
the explanation of this fact lies in an i^erited tendency to 
achlorhydria or gastritis in certain families. The condition, 
though often unrecognised, is very common and a frequent 
cause of chronic ill-health. 

Symptoms. — ^These will depend on the degree of anaemia 
and include lassitude, breathlessness, palpitation, vague dys- 
pepsia, anorexia, and pallor, which, however, even when severe 
has not the yellow tinge of pernicious anaemia. The nails are 
often atrophic and spoon-shaped (koilonychia). The tongue 
may be smooth and atrophic and cracks may occur at the 
comers of the mouth (perleche). The spleen is sometimes 
slightly enlarged. 

In a proportion of cases the patient complains of a difficulty 
in swallowing localised to the lower pharyngeal region. This 
results from a chronic hj’popharyngitis which produces a 
definite narrowing of the lumen of the pharynx, readily visible 
through the cesophagoscope. There may be a failure of relaxa- 
tion of the sphincter formed by the lower division of the inferior 
constrictor muscle of the pharynx, analogous to that which 
occurs in achalasia of the cardia. Dysphagia of this type in 
anaemia is often described as the Pliimmer-Vinson syndrome. 
It can be relieved by passing a thick rubber mercury bougie, and 
it disappears when the anseraia is abolished by treatment 
with iron. 

The blood count is not characteristic, but the colour index 
is always low, usually about 0-6 to 0-7. The average red count 
is 3 to 4 millions and the hiemoglobin 40 to 50 per cent. The 
leucocyte count is normal. The red cells are usually smaller 
than normal. There is no haemolysis and the van den Bergh 
reaction is negative. 

The condition is an extremely chronic one and patients 
have often been known to have suffered from anaemia for 
years before a definite diagnosis is made. 

Diagnosis. — Idiopathic hypochromic anaemia must be 
differentiated from anaemia due to organic disease, such as 
carcinoma or chronic haemorrhage. A careful clinical examina- 
tion and investigations are important to exclude such causes 
for the anaemia. 



360 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

Treatment. — Iron, provided it is given in sufiSciently large 
doses, is as specific in the treatment of idiopathic hypochromic 
ansemia as is liver in pernicious anaemia. It must be given in 
doses at least twice as large as the maximal pharmacopoeial 
dose, and should always given by mouth. Injections of 
iron are either ineffective or dangerous. The best preparation 
is iron and ammonium citrate, of which at least 90 gr. should 
be given in the twenty -four hours. The drug is best given as a 
saturated solution in 20 to 30 minim doses thrice daily taken 
in a small quantity of milk. This masks the astringent taste. 
Blaud’s pill (Pilula Ferri B.P.) is an alternative. The pills 
must be fresh and three or four of the 5-gr. pills should be 
taken tlirice daily. Liver is ineffective, and the anaemia is 
ver}" rarely severe enough to justify transfusion. 

Chlorosis. — This form of anaemia was extremely common 
until thirty years ago among adolescent females, but it is now 
never seen, probably as a result of improved conditions of 
life. It was characterised by an anaemia with low colour 
index and a greenish tint of the skin. It was often associated 
with digestive disturbances and hyperchlorhydria. Like 
idiopathic hypochromic anaemia, chlorosis responded readily 
to iron. 


Aplastic (Dyshjemopoietic) Anemia 

In this form of anaemia there is a failure on the part of the 
bone marrow to produce properly formed the elements of 
the blood, including red cells, white cells, and platelets. The 
erythropoietic tissue is chiefly involved. The toxic form of 
aplastic anaemia may result from the effects of certain poisons 
on the bone marrow, such as l)enzol, occasionally arsj)henamine, 
sulplionamide.s, radium, X-rays, and thorium. Some cases 
are met with in which there is no obvious cause. The lx>ne 
raarrow^ is fatty and atrophic. Fortunak*ly aplastic anaemia 
is a very rare disease. 

The symptoms are tliose of a profound anaemia ; the w)lour 
index is usually about unity, the red cells of normal average 
diameter (normocytic) and the whik*. count is low. The 
platelets may be also much diminished, in which case haemor- 
rhages and petechisD are a prominent feature, as in thrombo- 
cytopenic purpura. Progress is nearly always steadily downhill, 
and liver and iron produce no beneficial effects. Blood 
transfusion is of temporary benefit, and a few instances are on 
record in which there has been some recjovery in ha^mo|K)ietic 
functions, but tisually within a few weeks the anjemia bccjomes 



ANAEMIA IN PREGNANCY 


361 


as severe as ever. A few patients with the disease have been 
kept alive for several years by transfusions at about fortnightly 
intervals. Owing to the very low white count and inability 
to produce a physiological leucoc 5 dx) 8 is, patients with aplastic 
anaemia have very poor resistance to infections. 

Secondary carcinomatous deposits in the bone marrow may 
result in (a) the appearance of a few immature, malformed 
red or wWte cells in the circulating blood, and (b) actual 
replacement of the haemopoietic tissue by the neoplasm may 
later also produce an anaemia of the aplastic type. Osteo- 
sclerosis, occurring in various conditions in which the bone 
marrow is encroached upon by proliferating connective tissue 
and newly deposited bone, may have similar effects upon the 
blood picture. Both these types of anaemia are sometimes 
described as myelophthisic anaemia. Chronic sepsis or nephritis 
may markedly inhibit erythropoiesis. Similar effects may be 
seen in lack of vitamin C (scurvy) and thyroxin deficiency 
(myxoedema). 


Anemia in Pbegnanct 

Since the War anaemia during the later months of pregnancy 
has attracted considerable attention. Tliree types have been 
recognised : (i) microcytic iron-deficiency anaemia, (ii) maM3ro- 
cytic anaemia of pernicious type, (iii) haemolytic or “ refraetory ” 
anaemia. 

The microcytic type is seldom severe but is relatively 
common, especially among the hospital class of patient. It 
can be prevented or cured by giving iron. It probably is due 
to war-time dietary. 

The macrocytic type has a blood picture similar to that of 
pernicious anaemia, but gastric achylia is not a constant finding, 
though the gastric acidity is often low. The anaemia is often 
severe. The condition appears to l)e common in India but 
relatively infrequent in Great Britain. Most of the patients 
react readily to liver treatment but in specially severe cases 
blood transfusion may be required in addition. After parturi- 
tion continuance of liver treatment is unnecessary. 

The haemolytic or “refractory” type is relatively rare. 
The anaemia is macrocytic but the patient is usually refractory 
to liver treatment. The percentage of reticulocytes is high 
even before liver is given and there is a 8tn)ngly positi\ e indirect 
van der Berg reaction. Blood transfusions are effective. 
Sometimes the anaemia responds to feeding with whole liver 
l>6tter than to injections of liver extract. 



362 


DISEASES OP THE BLOOD 


Agranulocytosis 

The term agranxilocytosis indicates a condition in which 
there is an absence of, or a great diminution in, the granular 
forms of leucocytes. The total white cell count is low and the 
polymorphonuclear cells may be reduced to 5 per cent, or 
less. In conjimction with this agranulocytosis the patient 
suffers from severe ulcerative and necrotic inflammation, most 
commonly seen aroimd the fauces and buccal cavity, but 
sometimes in other regions, such as the rectum or vagina. 
The onset of symptoms is usually sudden, though the patient 
may have been in poor health for some time. The temperature 
is raised and the constitutional symptoms severe. Death often 
occurs within a week. In view of the frequency of ulceration 
in the throat, the condition is sometimes described as agranulo- 
cytic angina. 

The agranulocytosis probably precedes the necrotic lesions, 
which occur as a result of secondary infection owing to the 
patient's diminished powers of resistance. The absence of 
granular white cells in the blood may be due to interference 
with the maturation of the precursors of the granular leucocjies 
in the bone marrow. The factors which influence the bone 
marrow are unknown, but in a large proportion of cases of 
agranulocytosis drugs appear to be the chief aetiological factors. 
There is much evidence that the condition may follow the 
taking of amidopyrine (pyramidon) or preparations which 
contain amidopyrine. The sulphonamide group of drugs may 
cause agranulocytosis {vide p. 9). Agranulocytosis occasion- 
ally occurs after administration of arsphenamine, sanocrysin, 
and other preparations of gold. In recent years the condition 
has become much more common, possibly due to widespread 
use of sulphonamides. 

The mortality of agranulocytosis is high, probably between 
40 and 80 per cent. Blood transfusion may bo used as a tem- 
porary measure. Stimulating doses of X-rays to the long Imnes 
have sometimes produced a rise in the granular elements of the 
blood and a remission of symptoms. Perhaps more valuable is 
Pentnucleotide, which stimulates the bone marrow to produce 
granulocytes. The drug is available in 10 c.c. ampoules, each 
containing 0-7 grm. One ampoule is injected intramuscularly 
twice a day until the leucocyte count begins to rise ; this 
may be expected to occur in four or five days. Subsequently 
one ampoule a day is given until the count reaches normal 
figures. 



PURPURA 363 

Needless to say, in every case of agranulocytosis it is essential 
to ascertain that the patient is not taking on his own account 
any of the drugs which might give rise to agranulocytosis. 

PURPURA 

There are many conditions in which haemorrhage may occur 
in the skin, from the mucous membranes, in the joints, or 
indeed in any organ of the body. At the present time our 
knowledge of the pathology of such haemorrhagic states is very 
incomplete, and it is therefore difficult to draw up any 
satisfactory classification on an aetiological basis. The following 
provisional classification is based chiefly on clinical experience. 

1. Symptomatic purpura. This may occur in infections, 
e.g.^ septicaemia, subacute bacterial endocarditis, cerebrospinal 
fever, and the haemorrhagic forms of the specific fevers. It 
also occurs in toxic conditions, c.g^., uraemia, cirrhosis of the 
liver, and in severe anaemias and leukaaemias. 

2. Purpura haemorrhagica or thrombocjrtopenic purpura. 

3. Hereditary haemorrhagic states : (1) haemophilia, (2) 

hereditary telangiectasia, (3) hereditary purpura haemorrhagica. 

4. Anaphylactoid purpura. .Henoch’s and SchOnlein’s 
purpura. 

Haemorrhage may obviously result from a number of factors, 
concerned either with the blood itself or some alteration in the 
permeability of the capillaries. It is not necessarily in associa- 
tion vnth failure of the blood to clot. Indeed, in most forms 
of haemorrhage, except in haemophilia, there is no prolongation 
of the clotting time. Diminution in the number of platelets 
may be associated with a tendency to haemorrhage, and in the 
severe form of purpura, often taown as thrombocytopenic, 
the platelets may be practically absent. Haemorrhage of the 
purpuric type is, however, not necessarily associated with a 
decrease in the number of platelets. Thus in anaphylactoid 
purpura the fault is probably an increased permeability of the 
capillary wall, and the condition may be allied to urticaria. 
The underlying cause of thrombocytopenia (diminution in the 
number of platelets) is as yet uncertain. 

Symptomatic Pubpitra 

Little is known of the pathological changes associated 
with Bjrmptomatio purpura. The platelets may be decreased, 
normal, or increased in number, il^bably the purpura is due 
to changes in the walls of the capillaries, induced perhaps by 



364 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 


infection or toxsemia. The variations in the platelet content 
of the blood may be purely a secondary result of the 
haemorrhage. Symptomatic purpura may occur in the following 
conditions : — 

1. Infections. — Most of the specific fevers, such ats measles 
and smallpox, have haemorrhagic forms, fortunately rare, in 
which haemorrhage occurs in the skin and elsewhere. In 
cerebrospinal fever cutaneous haemorrhages are relatively 
common and have given the disease its name of spotted fever. 
Purpura in the form of petechiae and ecchymoses is common 
in streptococcal and staphylococcal septicaemia. It also occurs 
in subacute bacterial endocarditis, where it may be the result 
of minute infarcts. 

2. Toxic Disturbances. — Purpura may be present in uraemia, 
cirrhosis of the liver, and in advanced malignant disease. 

3. Poisons. — Arsphenamine and sanocrysin may produce 
purpura, but probably only in persons who are in some way 
sensitive to the drug. 

4. Severe Anoemia. — In severe anaemia of all types cutaneous 
haemorrhage is not uncommon. This is speciaUy true of the 
acute leukaemias, aplastic anaemia, and pernicious anaemia. 

5. Vitamin Deficiencies. — Scurvy, both adult and infantile. 

Pttrpura Hemorrhagica 

This condition is also termed Thrombocytopenic P^irpura 
or I]ssential Thrombocytopenia, owing to the fact that the 
platelets are much diminished in numl)ers. The disease varies 
very greatly in its degree of severity. The part played by 
the platelete is unknown, but, at any rate during periods of 
haemorrhage, they are extremely reduced in the blood. The 
coagulation time of blood collected in a tube is normal, i.e., 
about three and a half to four minutes at ST'’ C., but the bleed- 
ing time {vide p. 338) is much prolonged, if at the time it is 
tested the patient is suffering from hiemorrhage. Normally 
the bleeding from a simple prick should cease within about 
three to four minutes. In purpura ha*morrhagica it may be 
sometimes observed to continue four or five times as long. 

Symptoms. — Purpura haemorrhagica occurs both in an acute 
and chronic form. In the former the onset may be very abrupt 
with profase haemorrhage, which renders the i)atient dangerously 
anaemic within a few hours. The bleeding may l>e from a number 
of different areas, such as the nose, intestinal tract, or uterus, 
or it may be at first entirely from a single source. There are, 
however, nearly always some petechiae or ecchymoses in the 



PURPURA 


365 


skin, which point to the condition being a general rather than 
a local one. In some cases bleeding may persist, whatever is 
done, and the patient may die within a week of anaemia and 
exhaustion, or a cerebral haemorrhage may prove fatal. More 
often, however, the bleeding ceases and within a few weeks 
the patient is restored to comparatively good health. Recur- 
rences of haemorrhage, however, are common. 

Chronic forms of purpura hsemorrhagica, which often start 
in childhood, are more frequently encountered. Purpura is 
recurrent or persistent and haemorrhage occurs from the mucous 
membranes, but it is usually not so severe as in the acute 
forms and the patient is less anaemic. In chronic types the 
spleen is often palpable, whereas in the acute type there is 
seldom any enlargement. 

In all forms of purpura haemorrhagica the platelet count is 
low when the patient is having symptoms, but during remissions 
it may reach a normal figure (250,000 to 400,000 per c.mm.). 
When the platelets faU below 40,000, haemorrhage usually 
occurs, and during severe bleeding the platelets may be almost 
completely absent. There is generally a slight leucocjtosis, 
and nucleated red cells may be seen. The so-called “ capillary 
resistance tost is positive when bleeding is likely to occur. 
The tourniquet of a blood-pressure apparatus is put around the 
arm and blown up to midway between the diaustolic and the 
systolic pressures for five minutes. The cuff is then removed, 
and if the test is positive, numerous purpuric spots appear 
l>elow the level of the tourniquet. If blood is drawn from a 
patient with a<‘tive purpura haemorrhagica the retraction of the 
clot is delayed, though there is no prolongation of clotting time. 

Differential Diagnosis. — Ac\itc purpura hjemorrhagica can 
be readily distinguished from acute leukaemia by the presenc^e 
of myelocytes and myeloblasts in the latter disease ; in 
leukaunia, as in purpura hamiorrhagica, the platelets may be 
very much reduced. It is important to remember that some- 
times purpura may be almost or completely absent, and if 
the bleeding is always from one organ, such as the intestine, 
there is a risk of the general nature of the disease being 
overlooked. In such cases the platelet count is of great value. 
The symptomatic purpuras are usually readily distinguished if 
the patient is thoroughly examined. 

treatment. — In many of the milder cases rest in bed 
abolishes the symptoms, and in the chronic forms of the 
disease, as the patient gets older the condition abates. No 
drugs (including liver) are of any value, though iron may aid 
convalescence when hiemorrhage has ceased. In chronic types 



366 


DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

splenectomy often produces remarkably successful results, and 
provided the patient is not seriously anaemic at the time of 
operation the mortality is low. In the acute forms of the 
disease with severe hsemorrha^ the mortality of splenectomy 
is very high, and before contemplating operation a series of small 
fresh blood transfusions (10 oz. at a time) should be tried. 
Haemorrhage sometimes seems to cease following transfusion. 
The platelet count rises immediately after transfusion, and later 
usually falls again to below normal, but immediate recurrence 
of symptoms is unusual. Splenectomy should only be advised 
when the diagnosis of purpura haemorrhagica has been confirmed 
by recurrent haemorrhage, a low platelet coimt, prolonged 
bleeding time and a normal coagulation time, and a positive 
capillary resistance test. Operation is inadvisable, except as 
a desperate measure, when the patient is bleeding profusely 
and severely anaemic. In such cases several transfusions should 
be given before splenectomy. 

Hereditary ILsmorrhagic States 

1. Haemophilia. — This remarkable hereditary disease is 
confined to males, but is transmitted by the female, who, 
however, shows no manifestations of it herself. Family records 
show the persistence of the condition over periods as long as 
two hundred years. The clotting time of the blood is imduly 
long. This is probably due to increased stability of the plate- 
lets, whereby they do not disintegrate and hberate the thrombo- 
kinase required for the activation of prothrombin. The bleeding 
time in haemophilia is normal. 

Symptoms of the disease commence in infancy and are 
usually most severe before puberty ; in those who survive to 
adult life the tendency to haemorrhage appears to diminish. 
Bleeding may occur into the skin in the form of ecchymoses, 
as the result of minor degrees of trauma which would not 
afiect a normal person. Haemorrhage from the mucous mem- 
branes, particularly from the nose and gums, is common. 
Small cuts on the skin may bleed steadily for hours as the 
result of capillary oozing, and even minor operations such as 
the extraction of teeth may be fatal. When bleeding is pro- 
longed severe anaemia may develop, but the blood-forming 
organs appear to have great powers of blood regeneration. 
Occasionally haemorrhages occur into joints, whi^ become 
swollen and painful. (Complete recovery of function may 
result after aspiration or absorption of the effused blood, but 
in course of time a crippling osteoarthritis may result. 



PURPURA 


367 


VarioTiB measures have been tried for stopping bleeding ; 
if the site is readily accessible, firm and prolonged pressure 
may be efFective. Adrenalin or snake venom may be applied 
loc^y, and direct applications and injections of normal horse 
serum are recommended. Blood transfusion helps to promote 
coagulation as well as to restore haemoglobin to the circulation, 
and is essential immediately before even the smallest surgical 
procedure. Trauma must be avoided at all costs and operations 
or tooth extraction performed only when absolutely necessary. 
Females from a haemophilic family should not bear children. 
Liver feeding is useless, but beneficial results have been claimed 
for administration of ovarian extracts such as theelin, and 
extracts of egg white. 

2. Hereditary Telangiectasia. — This is a rare condition in 
which minute telangiectases or angiomata are found on the 
skin and mucous membranes, particularly in the nose. The 
cutaneous telangiectases are innocuous, but those in the 
nose or alimentary canal may bleed severel)’' and produce 
severe anaemia. The condition is hereditary’' and familial, 
affecting both sexes. Iron and transfusions are the only 
treatment available. 

3. Hereditary Porpora Haemorrhagica. — In certain families 
there is a tendency to haemorrhage, as shown by epistaxis or 
purpura. The coagulation time is not lengthened but the 
platelets are generally low and the disease resembles thrombo- 
cytopenic purpura. Splenectomy is of no value, and if severe 
haemorrhage occurs transfusion may be necessary. 

Anaphylactoid Purpura 

This type of purpura includes Henoch’s purpura and 
SchOulein’s disease. There is neither deficiency of platelets nor 
lengthening of the coagulation time. The walls of the capillaries 
are unduly permeable and allow blood cells and plasma to 
pass out into the tissues. 

In SchOnlein 8 disease purpuric spots, urticarial wheals, or 
angioneurotic swellings appear on the skin, and joints may be 
swollen and tender. There is often slight pjTexia and a sore 
throat. The condition was formerly thought to be akin to acute 
rheumatism and was known as peliosis or purpura rheumatica. 
Spontaneous recovery takes place and there is no specific 
treatment. 

In Henoch’s purpura the main symptoms are attacks of 
severe abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea. Blood may 
be passed by the bowel. Swelling of joints, purpura, and 



368 DISEASES OE TfiE BLOOD 

urticaria occur, but are a less prominent feature than in 
SchOnlein’s disease. The abdominal symptoms are due to 
exudation of plasma and blood into the wall of the intestine. 
Rarely tliis may produce an intussusception. Treatment is 
symptomatic only, and on no account should splenectomy be 
performed. Anaphylactoid purpura occurs mainly in children 
and during early adult life. 


LEUKAEMIA 

Under the general heading of leukaemia are included a 
number of clinical conditions in which the white cells are 
abnormal, both quantitatively and qualitatively. While the 
various forms of leukaemia differ widely in their symptoms and 
course, they resemble one another in that they are eventually 
uniformly fatal. 

The leukaemias are classified into acute and chronic varieties 
and also according to the type of leucocyte chiefly involved. 
The acute leukaemias comprise acute myelogenous and acute 
lymphatic, according as the neutropliils or the lymphocytes 
are at fault. The chronic types consist of chronic myelogenous 
(often termed spleno-meduUary) leukaemia, which is very 
occasionally eosinophilic, and chronic lymphatic leukaemia. 
In addition there are rare forms of leukaemia known as 
aleukaemic leukaemia, chloroma, monocytic leukaemia, and 
leuco-erjiihroblastic anamia. The acute leukaemias are difficult 
to distinguish on clinical grounds and may be described 
together. 

Nothing is known of the aetiology of the leukaemias. By 
some they are regarded as new growths of the bone marrow, 
by others as a reaction of the marrow to infection. Occasionally 
acute leukaemia has followed injuries of bones or osteomyelitis. 
Heredity does not appear to play any part. 

Acute Leukaemia. — The main clinical features of the acute 
leukaemias are a rapidly fatal illness, pyrexia, a liability to 
early and severe haemorrhage, ulcerative and necrotic lesions 
in the mouth and a severe and rapidly progressive anaemia 
usually of a microcytic type. Primitive red cells of all tyi^es, 
particularly normoblasts and reticulocytes, are frequently 
present. The spleen and lymphatic glands are seldom much 
enlarged and often impalpable. The blood picture varies 
with the acuteness of the disease and the type of white cell 
mainly implicated. The total leucocyte count is rarely over 
30,000 imtil shortly before deaths when it may rise suddenly 



LEUKiEMIA 


369 


to 100,000. Acute myelogenous leukaemia is the type most 
commonly encountered ; in this disease practically all the 
circulating white cells are myeloblasts. By ordinary staining 
methods the myeloblasts are non-granular and may be 
confused with large lymphocytes, but they may be shown to be 
primitive forms of granular cells if stained by the peroxidase 
method, which stains the granules in the cytoplasm of all but 
the most immature cells of the granular series. In acute 
lymphatic leukaemia, which is excessively rare, the lymphocytes 
and lymphoblasts account for over 90 per cent, of the total 
white count. 

The onset of acute leukaemia is usually abrupt and resembles 
that of any acute pyrexial illness. Very rarely the white cells 
may at first show no very definite abnormalities. In some cases 
severe ulceration and necrosis of the gums, tonsils, and pharynx 
are striking features. In others, haemorrhagic symptoms pre- 
dominate, such as epistaxis, uterine haemorrhage, purpura, 
haemorrhage into the brain or retina or from the intestinal or 
urinary tract. The haemoglobin rapidly falls to about 20 per 
cent, and the colour index is usufilly low. Occasionally lymphoid 
deposits are found in the skin. Patients with acute leukaemia 
seldom survive for more than a few months, and in the more 
acute varieties death may occur within a fortnight. 

Chronic Myelogenous Leukaemia. — The onset is extremely 
insidious and often the first symptom is a sensation of dragging 
or weight in the left side of the abdomen due to an enormously 
enlarged spleen. The patient may also complain of lassitude 
and general ill-health. Sometimes a retinal haemorrhage may 
lead to the discovery of the condition. Blood examination 
in the early stages may show counts up to several hundred 
thousand leucocytes per cubic millimetre, but the hjemoglobin 
percentage and the number of red cells are often but little 
reduced. A typical differential count in a relatively early 
case shows the following percentages : neutrophils, 70 per 
cent. ; eosinophils, 2 per cent. ; basopliils, 3 per cent. ; myelo- 
blasts, 2 per cent. ; myelocj^tes, 18 per cent. ; lymphocytes, 
4 per cent. ; hyalines, 1 per cent. Basophil leucocytes are 
usually rather numerous, and this increase may call attention 
to the abnormal blood picture in any early cases. Normoblasts 
often occur and increase in number as the leukaemia pro- 
gresses. On physical examination the spleen is enormously 
enlarged and may extend down to the left iliac fossa, and 
its sharp edge with well-marked notches extends beyond the 
umbilicus. No glands are palpable, and the liver is usually 
not enlarged. 



370 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

In the course of months, or even years, anaemia of a hypo- 
chromic type develops and the general health becomes increas- 
ingly impaired. The blood picture gradually changes to that 
of acute myelogenous leukaemia, and the percentage of 
myeloblasts steadQy increases. At this stage there may be 
haemorrhage ftom mucous membranes. Ultimately death occurs 
from exhaustion or intercurrent infection. Pyrexia is absent 
until severe anaemia develops. In a very rare form of the 
disease all the immature cells are found to be eosinophilic 
(eosinophilic leukaemia). 

Chronic Lymphatic Leuksemia. — This type is relatively 
rare and usually occurs in males above the age of fifty. The 
onset is gradual, and the most striking clinical features are a 
generalist enlargement of the Ijmphatic glands, which are 
discrete and painless. The spleen is easily palpable but does 
not reach the enormous size attained in myelogenous leukaemia. 
The hver is often enlarged. The total white count is rarely 
over 100,000 and at least 90 per cent, of the cells are small 
l 3 anphocytes with occasional Hmphoblasts. Gradually a 
microcji^ic anaemia develops. Sometimes after a number of 
years an acute leukaemia may occur, or the patients die of 
exhaustion or from secondary infection. 

Aleuksemic Leoksemia. — Rarely in leukaemia the total 
number of white cells may remain low, but a differential count 
shows a high proportion of immature forms, t.e., myeloblasts, 
myelocji^es, or Ijonphoblasts. Sometimes the total white 
count may even be under 1,000. Most of the patients of this 
type ultimately develop obvious leukaemia, the white count 
rising considerably shortly before the end. 

Chloroma. — In this very rare condition nodular growths 
of lymphoid tissue are formed under the periosteum, especially 
in the orbit, skull, long bones, and sternum. The blood count 
is that of an acute leukaemia. Death occurs early, and a 
section of the chloromatous tumours shows a green colour 
which rapidly fades on exposure to air. 

Monocytic Leukaemia. — This condition is rare and tends to 
occur in middle life. It is frequently associated with ulcerative 
conditions in the mouth and pharynx, and is usually fatal within 
a few months. In it the total white count is as a rule less 
than 50,000, and 50 to 90 per cent, of the white colls are 
monocytes. 

Leuco-er3rthroblastic (osteosclerotic) Anaemia. — Cases have 
been described in which the clinical features and blood counts 
resemble those of a pernicious anaemia. There is, however, no 
improvement with liver treatment, and sooner or later myelo- 



LEUKJEMIA 371 

blasts and myelocytes appear and the patient presents the 
features of an acute leukemia. 

Differential Diagnosis of the Leoksemias* — Careful examina- 
tion of even a single blood film usually provides sufficient 
evidence for a diagnosis of leukaemia, and in the case of the 
acute forms of the disease it is often difficidt, if not impossible, 
to arrive at a correct diagnosis without the aid of a microscope. 
Failure to diagnose acute leukaemia is almost invariably due to 
lack of this elementary precaution. In every case of purpura 
or haemorrhagic mantfestations, unexplained severe anaemia, 
continued fever or ulcerative stomatitis, the suspicion of 
leukaemia must be borne in mind and a careful blood 
examination made. In the acute leukaemias, especially when 
haemorrhage is occurring, the platelets are diminished in 
number as in purpura haemorrhagica. A differential leucocyte 
count, however, will usuaUy settle the diagnosis between 
leukaemia and purpura. Leuco-erythroblastic anaemia may at 
first be mistaken for pernicious anaemia, but the failure of the 
disease to react to liver treatment and the appearance of 
myelocytes and myeloblasts eventually indicate the correct 
diagnosis. Aleukaemic leukaemia may simulate agranulocytic 
angina, but here again the character of the leucocytes is 
diagnostic. Direct examination of stained bone marrow films 
obtained by sternal pimcture may also be helpful in differential 
diagnosis. 

With the chronic forms of leukaemia there is rarely any 
difficulty in diagnosis. In the myelogenous form the disease 
can often be diagnosed with fair certainty on clinical grounds 
alone, and a blood examination will settle any confusion with 
splenic anaBmia or acholuric jaundice. Chronic lymphatic 
leukaemia may be mistaken for Hodgkin’s disease, lympho- 
sarcoma, glandular tuberculosis, or glandular fever unless the 
blood is examined. 

Prognosis and Treatment ol the Leukaemias. — As has 

already been stated, acute leukaemia in all its forms is rapidly 
and invariably fatal, and symptomatic treatment only is avail- 
able. Blood transfusion is of doubtful value and may produce 
severe reactions. In chronic myelogenous leukaemia deep 
X-ray therapy to the spleen and long bones undoubtedly 
reduces a high leucocyte count and the size of the spleen and 
makes the patient more comfortable. As the disease progresses 
X-ray treatment seems to lose its efficacy, and it is doubtful 
whether it appreciably delays the ultimate fatal issue. It 
does, however, keep the patient relatively fit for a longer 
time. Sometimes liver, iron, and arsenic appear to stave off 



372 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

the development of anaemia. In chronic lymphatic leukaemia 
deep X-ray treatment to the enlarged glands diminishes their 
size. 

The course of all chronic leukaemias is variable in individual 
cases. Patients have been known to live, even without treat- 
ment, for ten years or more, but in the majority death occurs 
within three years. Sometimes a subacute variety of myelo- 
genous leukaemia is encountered in which deep therapy is of 
little avad, and the patient dies within twelve months. 


POLYCYTHiEMIA 

Polycythaemia is a condition in which the number of red 
corpuscles m the blood is above the normal. Sometimes the 
increase is only relative, as, for instance, when the loss of 
large quantities of fluid from the body produces a concentra- 
tion of the blood ; m others there may be an absolute increase 
in the number of corpuscles, as, for example, in congenital 
heart disease or in those who reside at high altitudes. Apart, 
however, from conditions leading to a secondary polycythsemia, 
occasionally patients are met with in whom there is a persistent 
and real increase in the red corpuscles. Such cases are known 
as polycythaemia vera or erythraemia. 

Erythrsemia. — Nothing is known as to the causation of the 
condition, which occurs mainly in later life and is associated 
with a moderate enlargement of the spleen and sometimes 
with some degree of hypertension. The appearance of the 
patient is fairly characteristic. The colour of the skin is bluish - 
red rather than dark blue, as in cyanosis or congenital heart 
disease, and dilated veins may be visible. Complaint is made 
of headache, lassitude, and breathlessness. The red count 
varies from about 6,000,000 to 10,000,000 cells per cubic 
millimetre, and the leucocyte count is often above normal. 
The hsBmoglobin is well above 100 per cent., but the red cells 
are usually increased out of proportion to the haemoglobin 
percentage. The heart is often dilated. Occasionally patients 
with erythraemia ultimately develop leukaemia. 

The diseause is a chronic one, which may last for years, with 
exacerbations and remissions, and the patient may (lie of 
intercurrent infection or sometimes as the result of cerebral 
haemorrhage or thrombosis. Large haemorrhages may occur 
from the alimentary trac^, nose, or elsewhere, rendering the 
patient anaexnic. Some patients show a tendency to intra- 
vascular clotting with its resultant sequelae, such m coronary 



POLYOYTHLEMIA 


373 


thrombosis. Repeated venesections help to relieve the symp- 
toms, and X-ray applications to the long bones are often 
successful. The oral administration of phenylhydrazine 
hydrochloride reduces the red cell count by increasing the 
tendency to haemolysis, but it must be given with caution as 
the effect may be prolonged and the fall in the red count 
continue after administration of the drug has ceased. 
The drug is given by mouth in daily doses of 2 gr. for 
seven to ten days, but its use must be carefully controlled 
by blood counts. 

METILEMOGLOBINiEMIA AND SULPH^MOGLOBIN^MIA 

In these conditions the most striking clinical feature is 
cyanosis, affecting chiefly the lips, mucous membrane of the 
mouth and the nail-beds, unaccompanied by any respiratory 
embarrassment. The cyanosis is due to the formation of 
methsemoglobin or sulphsemoglobin in the blood. In the 
great ifiajority of cases the cyanosis is due to sulphaemoglobin, 
and occurs as a result of repeated ingestion of certain aniline 
dye derivatives, such as acetanilide or phenaoetin ; these 
drags are often present in “ headache remedies. At the 
present time drugs of the sulphonamide type are the most 
frequent cause of the condition {vide p. 8). Probably other 
factors apart from such drags may play a part in the production 
of cyanosis. Most of the recorded cases of sulphaemoglobinaemia 
give a history of severe and chronic constipation, and it is 
probable that hydrogen sulphide formed in the colon may, 
under the influence of the aniline derivatives, unite with 
hsemoglobin to form sulphaemoglobin. In addition to constipa- 
tion there is often a history of frequent headaches and some 
degree of mental instability, the he^ache being generally the 
reason for the drug habit. Methaemoglobinaemia is a rarer 
condition, and occurs as an acute poisoning following a massive 
dose of an aniline derivative, either ingested or absorbed 
through the skin. The condition has also been described in a 
few patients in whom there appeared to be no evidence of drug 
addiction. 

The disease is readily diagnosed by the discovery of the 
absorption bands of methaemoglobin or sulphaemoglobin in 
the blood spectrum. Clmicadly it may be suspect^ when 
cyanosis, particularly affecting the lips and fingers, occurs 
without any history or evidence of ^ortness of breath on 
exertion. With withdrawal of the drug concerned the cyanosis 
rapidly disappears if it is due to methaemoglobin, but much 



374 DISEASES OF THE BLOOD 

more slowly in cases of siilphsemoglobin. No special treatment is 
usually required beyond keeping the bowels open. Sulphates 
must not be given for this purpose. 

HjEMOGLOBINiEMIA AND HSMOGLOBINTJBIA 

In normal blood haemoglobin is present in the corpuscles 
only, but in a variety of pathological conditions it is found also 
in the plasma owing to disintegration of red corpuscles. When 
thia occurs to any considerable extent haemoglobin is excreted 
in the urine and the patient is said to be suffering from haemo- 
globinuria. The occurrence of the latter symptom always 
implies the existence of haemoglobinaemia or free haemoglobin 
in the plaisma. 

Haemoglobinaemia occurs in the following conditions : 
(1) following blood transfusion if the serum of the recipient 
haemolyses the donor’s corpuscles ; (2) in blackwater fever 

{vide p. 180) ; (3) in poisoning by certain drugs, notably 

potassium chlorate and arseniuretted hydrogen ; (4) in severe 
bums. In addition to the above, haemoglobinaemia and 
haemoglobinuria occur as transient but recurring phenomena 
in certain individuals, who are then said to suffer firom 
paroxysmal haemoglobinuria. 

Paroxysmal Hsemoglobinoria. — The paroxysms are initiated 
by exposure to cold. During attacks there may be general 
symptoms such as lassitude, vomiting, and slight pyrexia. 
The urine becomes dark in colour, and on spectroscopic 
examination shows the absorption bands of haemoglobin and 
often of methaemoglobin, but no red corpuscles can be seen with 
the microscope. Attau^ks last from a few hours to a day and 
are seldom dangerous to life, but occasionally the deposi- 
tion of haemoglobin in the renal tubules leads to anuria 
and uraemia. 

If the finger of a patient liable to haemoglobinuria is placed 
in iced water with its circulation stopped by a tourniquet, 
within a few minutes haemoglobinaemia occurs, amd blood 
taken from the finger contains free haemoglobin in the plasma. 
Also, if the serum of the patient be mixed with normal red 
corpuscles and cooled, the latter become laiked. Both these 
experiments indicate that cold is the precipitating factor in 
the production of haemoglobinaBmia. The almost constant 
findii^ of a positive Wassermann test in the blood of persons 
with paroxysmal haemoglobinuria suggests that in some way 
syphiUs may produce a haemolysin in the blood. 

TreoifnetU, — Obviously, avoidance of cold is of primary 



HODGKIN’S DISEASE 


376 


importance in the prophylaxis of paroxysms. During the 
attacks plenty of fluids must be taken in order to avoid 
concentration of the urine. Unfortunately, anti-syphilitic 
treatment is usually ineffective in preventing haemoglobinuria. 


HODGKIN’S DISEASE (LymphMmoma) 

Practically nothing of importance has been added to our 
knowledge of Hodgkin’s disease since it was flrst described 
by Hodgkin over a hundred years ago. 

iEtiology. — Hodgkin’s disease occurs more frequently in 
males than in females, and it is particularly prone to attack 
its victims during adolescence or early adult life. Nothing 
is known as to the circumstances favouring the develop- 
ment of the disease, which occurs with equal frequency 
among rich and poor, and no country or climate seems 
exempt. 

Symptoms. — The onset of the disease is usually gradual, 
and the first symptom noticed is an enlargement of some 
group of glands, most frequently in the neck. Later, as the 
disease progresses, other groups of lymph glands become in- 
volved, the patient loses weight, becomes anaemic, and some- 
times suffers from the effects of pressure of the glands on 
neighbouring structures. The symptoms referable to various 
organs are described separately l^low. 

1. Lymphatic Olands , — The typical glands of Hodgkin’s 
disease are enlarged and discrete, with no tendency to adhere 
either to the skin or to the deeper structures ; on palpation 
they feel elastic, but in the later stages become harder. They 
are neither painful nor tender. Eventually most of the lymph 
glands in the body become affected, but at the onset the most 
common site for glandular enlargement is the posterior triangle 
of the neck on one or other side. As a result of X-ray treatment 
or secondary infection of the glands, adhesions to the skin very 
occasionally occur, but in any early case the finding of a gland 
which is definitely adherent contraindicates a diagnosis of 
Hodgkin’s disease. 

2. Spleen , — This is enlarged in about oO per cent, of cases. 
It seldom extends more than 2 in. below the costal margin 
and is not tender. 

3. Cutaneous Manifestations, — Ih'uritus is sometimes an 
early symptom. It may continue throughout and prove a 
formidable problem in treatment. More rarely there are 
small deposits of lymphadenomatous tissue in the skin. 



376 DISEASES OF THE LYMPHATIC GLANDS 

4. Lungs . — Enlarged mediastinal glands may compress the 
lung. Pleural effusions occur in the later stages, due either to 
pressure on veins or to direct involvement of the pleura. 

5. Blood . — There is nothing tjrpical about the blood picture 
in Hodgkin’s disease. Sooner or later a severe ansemia develops. 
Eosinophilia (above 10 -per cent.) is foimd in about 10 per cent, 
of cases. 

6. Pyrexia . — ^Nearly all patients with Hodgkin’s disease 
are febrile at some time during its course. The fever is often 
low and irregular, and resembles that seen in pernicious anaemia 
and other blood diseases. Sometimes periods of pyrexia last- 
ing five to ten days occur, with apyrexial intervals between 
the attacks. Pyrexia of this type often occurring without 
obvious enlargement of external glands is known as the Pel- 
Ebstein Syndrome. In such cases there is an enlargement of 
the mediastinal glands. 

7. Nervous System . — Pressure of enlarged glands upon 
nerves often gives rise to pain. In rare cases a paraplegia 
develops as the result of pressure on the cord. 

Pathology. — The cause of Hodgkin’s disease remains un- 
discovered, Gordon has been able to produce an encephalitis 
in rabbits by intracerebral injection of lymphadenomatous 
glands, and it has been suggested that the disease is duo to an 
unknown virus. It certainly is not due to tuberculous infection, 
although the latter may sometimes be present as a complication. 
Nor is there any evidence that it is in the nature of a malignant 
growth except its invariably fatal issue. 

At autopsy the lymphatic glands are found to be enlarged, 
white, and homogeneous. The amount of fibrous tissue varies 
with the chronicity of the condition. Suppuration or caseation 
is rare, except in cases comphcated by tuberculosis. Micro- 
scopically there is an overgrowth of endothelial cells and 
fibrous tissue. The most characteristic histological features 
are the presence of giant cells, often with two or more nuclei 
and numerous eosinophil leucocyies. The spleen is moderately 
enlarged, and on section shows greyish -white areas about the 
size of peas which, under the microscope, show similar changes 
to those found in the lymph glands. These small deposits are 
scattered throughout the spleen, which is usually described as 
“ hard-bake.” Similar deposits occur in other organs, par- 
ticularly in the liver and intestinal tract. 

Diagnosis. — Although typical cases of Hodgkin’s disease 
can be diagnosed on clinical groimds, it is often impossible to 
be certain of the diagnosis without excising a gland. Some- 
times even the histological examination of a gland may leave 



HODGKIN’S DISEASE 


377 


the diagnosis in doubt, and in such oases the production of 
encephalitis in a rabbit injected with the suspected gland may 
be of value in diagnosis. The resemblance between the glandular 
enlargement of Hodgkin’s disease and that due to tuberculosis 
is so close that mistakes are very common, unless a gland be 
removed for section. Examination of a blood film will readily 
exclude lymphatic leukaemia, while the enlarged glands in 
syphilis are usually smaller, harder, and more shotty to the 
touch than in Hodgkin’s disease, and the epitrochlear glands 
are seldom enlarged in the latter disease. Glandular enlarge- 
ments in the neck due to septic teeth or infections of the 
scalp may be mistaken for Hodgkin’s disease. Malignant 
glands in the neck are usually localised and extremely hard. 
In lymphosarcoma the glands tend to produce pressure 
symptoms earlier than in Hodgkin’s disease, but in cases 
of doubt removal and section of a gland will determine 
the diagnosis. Lastly, glandular fever may produce a 
generalised glandular enlargement, but in this disease 
there is tenderness on palpation of the glands, a relative 
monocytosis in the blood and the heterophile antibody 
reaction will be positive. 

In some cases of Hodgkin’s disease where the superficial 
lymphatic glands do not become enlarged imtil late in the 
disease, the severe anaemia which sometimes develops may 
suggest pernicious or other form of anaemia. A pyrexia without 
obvious cause, particularly if it assumes the typical Pel- 
Ebstein type, should always arouse a suspicion of Hodgkin’s 
disease in the mediastinal or retroperitoneal glands. An 
X-ray of the chest may demonstrate the presence of masses 
in the mediastinum. 

Treatment. — Unfortunately there is no specific treatment 
for Hodgkin’s disease. Although temporary improvements may 
occur firom time to time, the disease pursues a relentless down- 
hill course, imtil death occurs as the result of anaemia and 
exhaustion or from the pressure effects of the enlarged glands 
on vital organs. In the early stages deep X-ray therapy and 
radium usually produce a rapid diminution in the size of the 
glands, but unfortunately relapse always occurs and further 
radiation treatment is usually ineffective. Attempts to remove 
the affected glands by surgical means are always futile. The 
only drug that appears to have any beneficial action is arsenic 
taken in large doses. With severe pruritus veronal in 10-gr. 
doses may be effective. 

J. J. CONYBEABE. 

P. A. Knott. 



378 


RETICULOSES 


SARCOIDOSIS 

Several syndromes of which Boeck described the first in 
1889 are now regarded as variants of one disease entitled 
Sarcoidosis, and in the aggregate these disorders though un- 
common are not rare. A characteristic chronic granulomatous 
inflammation with involvement of the reticulo -endothelial 
system occurs. Any organ of the body may be affected, 
and although investigation often shows that the disease is 
generalised certain clinical patterns of involvement predominate. 
These include the follo\^ing : — 

Eyes . — Uveoparotitis (Heerfordt), Iridocyclitis, Mikulicz’s 
disease. 

Shin . — Sarcoid (Boeck, and Darnier-Roussy), Lupus pernio. 
Angiolupoid. 

Bones . — Osteitis multiplex cystoides (Jungling). 

Lymjph Nodes . — Benign Lymphogranulomatosis (Schau- 
mann). 

Lunys . — Disseminated nodular and reticular pulmonary 
lesions with local glandular involvement. Non-caseating 
tuberculosis (Pinner), Pseudo-tuberculosis (Snapper). 

Other Organs. — (Spleen, liver, bone marrow, heart, nervous 
system, etc.), Universal large-celled sclerosing hyper- 
plasia (Schurmann). Chronic epithelioid cell reticulo- 
endotheliosis (Leitner). 

iEtiology. — As is the case with Hodgkin s di.sease, sar- 
coidosis is often regarded as a reticulosis of unknown cause. 

Among other possible aetiological factors tuberculosis seems 
the most probable, but the evidence is inconclusive. Tubercle 
bacilli have only occasionally been demonstrated in sarcoid 
lesions : and although tubercles are formed their histology 
is not typically tuberculous, indeed similar structures have 
been described in leprosy. Leishmaniasis, undulant fever, 
syphilis, typhus, and rheumatism. On the other hand, the 
geographical distribution of tuberculosis and sarcoidosis is 
similar — in African negroes, for example, sarcoidosis is almost 
unknown, in North American negroes it is fairly common — 
and tuberculosis in certain animals such as the horse and rat 
has a sarcoid histology. The Mantoux reaction in sarcoidosis 
is usually negative whatever the patient’s age, and if B.C.G. 
{vide p. 128 ) is injected subcutaneously the adducent lymph 
glands develop a sarcoid reaction, whereas in a normal individual 
previously uninfected with tuberculosis the same injection 



SARCOIDOSIS 


379 


provokes a typical tuberculous l3anph8uleiiitis. That constitu- 
tion may play a part is further suggested, since the disease 
has been observed in members of the same family. 

The greatest prevalence of the disease occurs between the 
ages of twenty and forty, though instances in infancy and old 
age have been recorded. The sexes are equally affected. A 
considerable proportion of cases die of undoubted acute miliary 
tuberculosis. 

Pathology. — The lymph glands, skin, eyes, lungs, spleen 
and bones are most often involved. Whatever the site, the 
lesion is characteristically a chronic granulomatous inflamma- 
tion, though the particular tissue involved greatly modifies 
the macroscopic appearances. 

Histological examination shows that tubercles are formed 
within a periphery of hyaline connective tissue. These tubercles 
sometimes contain one or more giant cells, but unlike those 
due to tuberculosis they usually consist almost entirely of 
rather large round epithelioid cells surroimded by a single 
layer of lymphocytes. Caseation, too, is absent or very slight, 
as is calcification. The adjacent fibrous tissue reaction may 
be well marked, and, of course, many such tubercles may 
coalesce. 

Clinical Features. — Very considerable variation exists in 
the pattern of symptoms and signs presented. Furthermore, 
though most cases follow a chronic course, in some tliis may be 
interrupted by relatively acute exacerbations, while in a few 
the disease is comparatively acute from onset to termination. 
In such cases, and when recrudescence of activity occurs in 
more chronic examples, the lesions are as a rule generalised. 
They give rise to toxaemia with malaise, pyrexia usually 
less than 102 ° F., sweating, anorexia, loss of weight, and 
amenorrhoea, together commonly with widespread discrete 
lymphadenitis, splenomegaly, hypochromic anaemia, and diffuse 
pulmonary lesions. The last may cause some dyspnoea, slight 
cyanosis and an unproductive cough. The blood sedimentation 
rate is raised. In addition the particular focal characteristics 
of the syndrome into which the case falls will be evident. In 
uveo -parotitis, for example, these may include iridocyclitis, 
which usually progresses and causes glaucoma and blindness, 
painless and probably symmetrical enlargement of the parotids, 
and transient seventh-nerve palsy ; while in Boeck’s sarcoid 
indolent hard red-brown nodules and plaques, for the most 
part on the face, are typical. 

Quite often, however, generalisation does not occur, or 
cannot be demonstrated, and then sjmptoms and signs of 



380 RETICULOSES 

constitutional disturbance are absent, and the local consequences 
are frequently those of a torpid protract/ed inflammation. 
Pain is not a feature of the disease except when ocular lesions 
are present, and then it is rarely severe. 

Radiological Appearances. — ^Pulmonary involvement is often 
only revealed by radiological examination. The appearances 
which are due to involvement of the pulmonary lymphatic 
system though commonly symmetrical are not necessarily 
so when the lesions are developing. They consist of a 
diffuse reticulation upon which is superimposed a rather 
coarse widespread nodulation. A gross symmetrical hilar 
and mediastinal Ijrmphadenopathy is usually associated. 
Osteitis multiplex cystoides affects the short bones of the 
hands and feet, and to X-ray the lesions appear as clear 
cystic spaces slightly expanding the bone, and situated 
usually toward its distal end. 

Diagnosis. — Certain syndromes, for example, Mikulicz’s 
disease, are unique, and so offer little difficulty in diagnosis. 
In others and when generalisation has occurred, frequently 
the bizarre and typical distribution of lesions will be highly 
suggestive, particularly if the short bones are involved. The 
chronicity of the process, and its low-grade toxaemia with 
resulting constitutional upset, the anergy to tuberculin as 
shown by the Mantoux reaction, radiological api)earanoe8 of 
the chest, and finally the histological appearances of a biopsy 
specimen will frequently suffice to identify the disease. 

Hodgkin’s disease, possibly lymphosarcoma, carcinomatosis, 
and widespread glandular tuberculosis may exceptionally 
cause difficulty in diagnosis, but will usually be distinguished 
by the last two investigations. It may, despite investigation, 
be quite impossible to distinguish chronic miliary tuberculosis 
from sarcoidosis, indeed it is not certain that a fundamental 
difference exists. The discovery, however, of living tubercle 
bacilli, the histological appearances and esjK'cially the demon- 
stration of caseation or calcification in any of the lesions, a 
greater preponderance of pulmonary nodulation, and less 
marked hilar lymphadenopathy to X-ray, though not decisive 
are all rather more suggestive of the former disorder. 

Prognosis. — Most authors maintain that the prognosis 
in sarcoidosis is good. However, from the instances occurring 
in which death results from involvement of the heart and 
brain, and the even more numerous cases in which tuberculosis 
is a fatal complication, it would seem probable that the 
benigmty of the disease has been overemphasised. Local 
lesions have a variable prognosis. Thus, usually the skin 



LYMPHO-SARCOMA 


381 


lesions slowly disappear, and they never ulcerate. On the 
other hand, loss of vision is very common when the eyes are 
involved. 

Treatment. — No really effective therapy is known. In the 
author’s opinion the most important single measure is long 
continued rest in bed followed by a protracted convalescence 
on sanatorium lines, when the disease is generalised, or, if the 
eyes are involved. 

X-ray therapy has proved to be of value in some cases of 
Mikulicz’s disease, and has also been employed with benefit 
by the author when the mediastinal lymph glands are involved. 
Its use might be extended in other instances. 

Tuberculin and ultra-violet light have been advocated. 
Their value is doubtful, but there is no doubt of their dangerous 
qualities when either the lungs or the eyes are affected. Local 
palliative procedures are available when necessary, depending 
on the site of the lesions. 

W. D. W. Brooks. 


LYMPHO-SARCOMA 

Sarcomatous growths may originate m lymphoid tissue in 
any part of the body, but most commonly in the lymphatic 
glands. The cervical glands are frequently involved, as are 
also those situated in the chest and abdomen. The symptoms 
depend mainly on the site of the glandular enlargement and on 
pressure effects on surrounding parts. With involvement of 
the mediastinal glands obstruction of the superior vena cava 
is likely to occur, and results in venous congestion of the upper 
part of the body. 

Glands affected by lympho-sarcoma are at first painless, 
and may remain unattached to the skin and surrounding 
structures. Sooner or later, however, these will become 
involved by the growth. Often several groups of glands may 
be enlarged simultaneously, and the clinical condition closely 
resembles Hodgkin’s disease. In order to arrive at a definite 
diagnosis it may be necessary to remove a gland for micro- 
scopical examination. 

If the lympho-sarcomatous glands are localised they should 
be excised, but when disseminated or very adherent they can 
often be rapidly reduced in size by deep X-ray tlierapy. Even 
after apparently complete removal a course of X-ray treatment 
is advisable. The outlook is always bad, particularly in cases 
with involvement of mediastinal glands. 



382 


DISEASES OF THE SPLEEN 


SPLENIC ENLARGEMENT 

Complete removal of the spleen is not incompatible with 
perfect health, and its physiological functions can undoubtedly 
be taken on by other organs. In adult life the spleen, as part 
of the reticulo-endothelial system, plays an important part 
in the destruction of red blood corpuscles and in the metabolism 
of iron. It also acts as a storehouse for a surplus supply of 
red corpuscles, which can be readily mobilised into the general 
circulation when required, as, for instance, after severe 
haemorrhage. It may also be concerned in the formation 
of antibodies as a reaction to infection. 

Splenic Enlargement. — This may occur in a variety of morbid 
conditions : (1) in acute infective conditions, e.gr., typhoid 

fever, septicaemia, subacute bacterial endocarditis ; (2) in 

chronic infections, e.gf., tuberculosis, congenital syphilis, possibly 
Hodgkin’s disease, glandular fever ; (3) in protozoal infections, 
e.g,, malaria, kala-azar ; (4) in diseases of the blood and blood- 
forming organs, c.^., pernicious anaemia, the leukaemias, 
acholuric jaundice, polycythaemia, and splenic anaemia ; (5) in 
conditions where there is interference with the circulatory 
system of the spleen, e.g,, thrombosis of the splenic vein, 
cirrhosis of the hver, or splenic infarction ; (6) in conditions 
in which the spleen appeeirs to store abnormal metabolites, 
e.g., amyloid disease ; (7) in very rare instances of neoplastic 
secondary deposits, e.g., melanotic sarcoma. 

In most of the diseases classified above, splenic enlarge- 
ment is but one, and often not the most prominent feature ; 
but in the group of splenic enlargements kno^m as splenic 
anaemia it is possible that the spleen is the primary seat of 
disease. 

To palpate for an enlarged spleen the examiner should 
stand on the right-hand side of the recumbent patient and 
place his right hand flat upon the abdomen with the fingers 
near the left costal margin. With the left hand the left lower 
ribs are pressed firmly forwards, and the patient is instructed 
to take a deep, slow breath. If the spleen is enlarged, it will 
be felt to descend fix)m under the costal margin against the 
exa minin g fingers. The characteristic features of a splenic 
tumour are : ( 1 ) a sharp lower edge in which sometimes a notch 
is palpable ; (2) the tumour is superficial, dull upon percussion, 
and the hand cannot get above the tumour ; (3) very 

large, it does not extend into the loin. The direction of enlarge- 
ment is downwards and inwards towards the umbilicus, and the 



DISEASES OF THE SPLEEN 


383 


tumour is found to move on respiration. With great enlarge- 
ment there may be visible bulging in the left hypochondrium. 
In acute infections the spleen is often tender and rather soft, 
but unless it is possible to feel a sharp lower margin it is 
dangerous to diagnose splenic enlargement. 

Splenic Anjbmia 

It is uncertain whether so-called splenic anaemia has any 
separate clinical entity. Probably many of the cases thus 
diagnosed were in reality instances of cirrhosis of various types 
with enlarged spleens, acholuric jaundice, chronic types of 
purpura, Gaucher’s splenomegaly, or even leukaemia. Certainly 
as knowledge of blood diseases has increased, splenic anaemia 
has become a less frequent diagnosis. 

The relationship between splenic anaemia and the condition 
of splenomegaly and cirrhosis of the liver, described in Italy 
by Banti and known by his name, has been a matter of dispute. 
It is often maintained that Banti’s disease represents a late 
stage in splenic anaemia. There is, however, little evidence in 
support of this assumption, though cirrhosis of the liver is 
often accompanied by more or less splenic enlargement. Many 
cases of splenic anaemia run their course wathout evidence of 
cirrhosis, and cases corresponding to Banti’s description of his 
disease are rare, if not unknown, in England. 

iEtiology and Pathology. — As it is uncertain whether splenic 
anaemia is a clinical or pathological entity as might be expected, 
nothing is known of its aetiology and pathology. There is no 
evidence of haemolysis and no constant pathological findings. 
When haematemesis occurs it is presumably due to rupture of 
oesophageal varices as in cirrhosis. 

Symptoms. — The onset of the disease is insidious, though 
occasionally haematemesis may be the first symptom to call 
attention to the condition. The spleen is much enlarged, 
hard, and often roaches the umbilicus or beyond. Anaemia of 
a microcytic tjq)e with a low eolom index and a leucopenia is 
usually present, quite apart from severe haematemesis, though 
when this occurs it naturally aggravates the anaemia. Haema- 
temesis is the most important and dangerous symptom, and 
may be both profuse and recurring. After the disease has 
lasted for some years there is sometimes evidence of the onset 
of cirrhosis of the liver. At first this organ may be enlarged, 
but eventually it tends to diminish in size, while jaundice, 
ascites, and emaciation develop. The patient usuaUy suffers 
from the s}unptom8 common to all anaemias, such as 



384 


DISEASES OF THE SPLEEN 


breathlessness, pallor, palpitation, and lassitude. As in other 
andemias, a hsemic murmur is often present over the base of 
the heart. Often the weight of the enlarged spleen produces 
dragging pains in the abdomen. Occasionally purpuric spots 
are seen on the skin. 

Course and Prognosis. — The disease is a very chronic one, 
and occasionally may last twenty years or more. Spontaneous 
recovery may occur, but more often the condition slowly 
progresses until it terminates in death from intercurrent 
infections, hsematemesis, or cirrhosis. 

Differential Diagnosis. — The occurrence of splenomegaly in 
several members of a family suggests Gaucher s splenomegaly 
or acholuric jaundice. If splenomegaly be associated with 
purpura or recurrent haemorrhage from the nose, gums, or else- 
where, purpma haemorrhagica is a possibility. The leucocyte 
coimt will be characteristic in leukaemia. 

Treatment. — Splenectomy is often advised in cases diagnosed 
as splenic anaemia. The results of the operation are often 
disappointing and do not compare wth those of splenectomy 
in acholuric jaimdice or thrombocytopenic purpura. Moreover, 
the mortahty is considerable. Large doses of iron are often 
beneficial and transfusion may l>e required, especially if the 
patient has had severe haematemesis. 

Gaucher’s Splenomegaly. — This disease was formerly con- 
sidered to be identical wth splenic anaemia. It differs from the 
latter in being frequently familial, though not hereditary. 
The spleen is enormously enlarged, but the anaemia is seldom 
as severe as in splenic anaemia. Haematemesis very rarely 
occurs, but shght epistaxis and bleeding from the gums is 
common. The liver is very large throughout the disease, but 
cirrhosis does not occur. In spite of the great enlargement of 
spleen and hver the disease is compatible with relatively good 
health for many years. The spleen, liver, lymph glands, and 
bone marrow are packed with characteristic large “ foamy 
lipoid cells of an endothelial type. In view of the relatively 
mild symptoms, splenectomy is not advisable. 

J. J. Conybbahe. 

F. A. Knott. 



DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY 

CANAL 

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

B oth in hospital and private practice very large numbers 
of patients are encountered whose main symptoms are 
rightly or wrongly referred to the abdomen. In conse- 
quence, one of the most frequent and yet most difficult 
problems which face the medical attendant is to decide to 
what extent the internal organs of digestion are affected by 
disease. It is imi>ortant to realise that of the many patients 
who complain of “ indigestion,’’ only a relatively small propor- 
tion suffer from organic lesions such as a peptic ulcer. Often 
the symptoms referred by the patient to his abdominal viscera 
are in reahty but reflex expressions of diseases elsewhere or 
an indication of a failure on the part of the patient to adjust 
himself satisfactorily to his environment. 

Although nervous indigestion ” is extremely common, it 
is most important, both from the point of view of the patient 
and of the doctor, that such patients should not be labelled 
as neurotics until a thorough examination and investigation 
has so far as possible excluded the presence of an organic 
lesion. We must all of us be familiar with those unfortimate 
individuals in whom a failure on the part of the doctor to 
diagnose organic disease in its earlier stages has allowed it to 
progress to a condition in which cure is difficult or impossible. 

In oases of suspected abdominal disease a careful history 
is of the utmost importance. The patient should be allowed 
to tell his own story. Particular attention should be devoted 
to the duration of his symptoms, the occurrence of remissions, 
the nature of his pain and its relationship to meals, the presence 
of constipation or diarrhoea. Apart from the actual information 
obtained in taking a careful history, the contact which it 
establishes between doctor and patient is of great value in 
enabling the physician to gain an insight into the mental 
attitude of the patient and his degree of sensibility to pain, 
points which are of great value in ffiagnosis. 

25 386 



S86 DISEASES OP THE ALIMENTAllY CANAL 

A thorough physical examination of all the systems of the 
body must never be omitted. Not infrequently this may 
reveal some unsuspected lesion, to which the abdominal 
symptoms are purely secondary. Thus, for example, the 
earliest symptoms of phthisis may be dyspepsia, or attacks 
of abdominal pain or vomiting may be due to tabes dorsalis, 
lead-poisoning, or urasmia. 

Before attempting to examine the abdomen, attention must 
be paid to the following points : (1) The patient should lie 
condortably on his back with his head slightly raised and 
supported on a pillow ; (2) the abdomen must be well and 
evenly illuminated ; (3) the hands of the examiner must be 
thoroughly warm. Neglect of any of these precautions will 
render efficient examination difficult or impossible. 

It is well to carry out an abdominal examination in a 
routine manner, beginning with inspection of the whole 
abdomen and lower part of the chest. The patient should 
be asked to indicate exactly the point at which any pain 
is felt. Note should be made of the general appearance 
of the abdomen, whether distended or flattened, and in 
the former case whether the distension is local or general. 
It is also easy to see whether there is any restriction oi 
the normal abdominal re.spiratory movements. Lastly, it is 
important to look for visible peristalsis : this may often 
be elicited by flicking the abdominal wall with a finger. 
In very thin subjects it is sometimes possible to see the 
peristaltic movements of normal small intestine, but as a 
rule visible peristalsis is of great significance, and indicates 
obstruction at some point in the alimentary canal. In 
such cases the peristaltic waves are repeated at interv^als in 
the same area and direction. 

Following inspection, the abdomen is examined by palpation. 
It is important to gain the patient’s confidence by beginning 
with gentle palpation with the hand flat on the abdomen. 
If one side or area of the abdomen is the seat of pain, the 
examination should be commenced by palpating some other 
part. During palpation cultivate a flow of small talk to the 
patient with a view to distracting his attention from what is 
being done, and never ask whether pressure at any particular 
point is painful. If a careful watch is kept on the patient’s 
face, the tender points, if any, will be instantly revealed by 
his expression, without the possibility of suggestion on the 
part of the examiner. The extent and localisation of rigidity 
of the muscular wall should be noted, and an attempt made 
by diverting the patient’s attention to abolish it. If the 



GENERAL CONSmERATIONS 387 

rigidity is persistent, and especially if it is associated with 
local tenderness on pressure, it will usually indicate inTolve- 
ment of the peritoneum. During palpation, tumours may be 
detected, and an attempt should then be made to detenxiine 
their mobility, more particularly with reference to respiratory 
movements. In addition to the central part of the aMomen, 
the flanks must be palpated bimanually ; while doing so the 
examiner should be on the same side of the patient as the 
flank to be examined, and should place one hand behind, 
immediately below the ribs, while the other presses on the 
front of the abdomen ; the patient is instructed to take 
deep breaths, and during inspiration tumours in the loin, 
such as an enlarged or unduly mobile kidney, may be felt 
to descend and may be gripped between the fingers. If 
the patient is cold, palpation of the abdomen is rendered very 
difiicult. 

Percussion of the abdomen is, as a rule, of little value 
except for the detection of “ shifting dullness ” when there 
is free fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Auscultation of the 
abdomen is of value in the diagnosis of acute abdominal 
conditions as the peristaltic movements of the intestines may 
be audible, thus rendering a diagnosis of peritonitis unlikely. 
Rarely a friction rub may be heard over an inflamed organ, 
such as the spleen or liver. 

Much stress xised to be laid on the detection of areas of 
cutaneous hyperajsthesia, but these are usually if not always 
the result of suggestion on the part of the examiner. If 
the stomach is much dilated, a succussion splash may be 
heard, when sudden pressure is exerted upon the epigastrium. 
This indicates delay in emptying, unless a meal has been 
taken within two hours of examination. 

The importance of investigations such as X-ray examina- 
tions, test meals, and chemical examinations of the fseces 
cannot be overestimated. During the last fifteen years advances 
in radiological technique have greatly increased the value of 
opaque meals and enemata. Valuable though these aids to 
diagnosis may be, it is still true that they are an addition to, 
and not a substitute for, a carefully taken history and a 
thorough physical examination. Every patient with digestive 
syinptoms, which fail to clear up within a reasonably short 
period, should be advised to undergo a thorough investigation 
to exclude serious organic disease. Such an investigation not 
mfrequently may reveal the presence of an organic lesion 
which has been entirely unsuspected from a consideration of 
the history and the physical examination. Negative findings 



388 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

are also of great value in reassuring not only the patient but 
the medical attendant. 

Rectal examination should be made in every case with 
abdominal symptoms. If this is neglected, there is always 
the risk of overlooking the presence of a rectal growth or of 
secondary deposits in the pelvis. Sigmoidoscopy is also 
frequently necessary {vide p. 439). 


DISEASES OF THE MOUTH 
Oral Sepsis 

Infection of the teeth and gums occurs in two forms : 
(1) pyorrhoea alveolaris ; (2) apical infection. Both of these 
types, which often coexist, are important as factors in many 
m^cal conditions, which include chronic gastritis, gastric 
and duodenal ulcer, rheumatoid arthritis, fibrositis, iritis, and 
possibly many other diseases. 

Pyorrhosa Alveolaris. — In this condition pockets are formed 
between the teeth and the gum margin, in which food debris 
collects and which become filled with pus. The alveolan: 
margin becomes gradually absorbed as a result of a rarefying 
osteitis, so that eventually the teeth become loose and may 
ultimately drop out. The edges of the gums become inflamed 
and bleed readily when touched, and by pressure on the 
gum margins pus can be squeezed out. During mastication 
considerable amounts of pus are swallowed and may produce 
chronic gastritis, or possibly peptic ulceration. Patients with 
pyorrhoea have increased salivation, and often complain of an 
unpleasant taste in the mouth and a foul breath. 

Pyorrhoea may be prevented by careful attention to the 
cleanliness of the teeth, and food debris must not be allowed 
to collect around them. Regular visits should be paid to a 
dental surgeon at least every six months. 

Apical Infection. — ^This is a more insidious condition than 
pyorrhoea, and is more likely to be overlooked. The affected 
teeth are always dead, but may appear perfectly healthy. A 
radiogram, however, shows pathological changes at the root. 
The condition is specially liable to occur around septic stumps 
and in teeth which have been devitalised by the dental surgeon. 
From its situation it is obvioiis that free drainage cannot take 
place, and there is great liability to the absorption of toxins 
or even of micro-organisms, which may give rise to an infective 
arthritis, fibrositis, or neuritis, and even to septiosBmia and 



DISEASES OP THE MOUTH 


389 


infective endocarditis. The organism most frequently found 
on culture is the Streptococcus viridaus. No reliance must be 
placed on the fact that there has been no toothache or that 
the teeth appear normal ; the only satisfactory way of estab- 
lishing the absence of apical infection or of osteitis of the 
alveolar margin is to take X-ray films of the teeth. An apical 
abscess, or indeed even a dead tooth, is always a potential 
source of danger, which can only be removed by extraction 
of the tooth and treatment of the cavity in the jaw. Autogenous 
vaccines may be prepared from the root of an extracted tooth. 

It is unwise to extract large numbers of teeth at one 
operation, especially if there is any considerable degree of 
sepsis. In any case the teeth should be scaled and cleaned 
before an extraction. Wholesale extractions cause much 
discomfort and often severe shock, which may be avoided 
by spreading the extractions over a longer period. 


Stomatitis 

Catarrhal Stomatitis occurs in association with gastro- 
intestinal disturbances in the specific fevers, or sometimes as 
the result of excessive indulgence in alcohol or oversmoking. 
The mucous membrane of the gums, lips, and cheeks appears 
red and swollen, and sometimes there is pain on mastication. 
A similar condition occurs as the result of overdosage with 
mercury or other heavy metals, particularly in the presence 
of oral sepsis. Treatment consists in the use of a mouth-wash 
after every meal and the application of borax and glycerin. 

Aphthous Stomatitis. — Slightly raised vesicles form on the 
mucous membrane of the lips and cheeks, wliich quickly rupture 
and produce small greyish ^cers with a red areola aroimd them. 
The condition may occur in children or debilitated patients, 
but is not uncommon in otherwise healthy persons ; the ulcers 
heal spontaneously if the mouth is kept clean, but often recur. 
In severe cases application of silver nitrate is beneficial. 
Aphthous stomatitis sometimes occurs during treatment 
with sanocrysin. 

Tbush* — ^The condition popularly known as thrush is a 
parasitic stomatitis due to a fungus, Otdium albicans. It 
infects chiefly the mouths of ill-nourished infants, especially if 
bottle-fed, but may also occur in adults who are suffering from 
debilitating illnesses. 

The mouth is dry, and scattered over the tongue, gums, 
cheeks, and palate there are white patches, irregular in shape 



390 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

and slightly raised above the surrounding mucous membrane. 
In infants there may be difficulty in swallowing and also 
diarrhoea, with excoriation of the skin aroimd the anus. 

The mouth should be kept clean with cotton-wool soaked 
in the following mixture : potassium chlorate, 30 gr. ; 
glycerinum boracis, ad 1 oz, and the patches painted with 
1 per cent, gentian violet solution. With this treatment and 
attention to the general health, recovery is usually rapid. 

Ulcerative Stomatitis. — Widespread ulceration may occur 
in the mouth as the result of infection with the spiroohsetes 
and fusiform bacilli which are found in Vincent’s angina (vide 
p. 601). The condition occurs in epidemic form, and may be 
associated with severe constitutional symptoms. The ulcers 
should be carefully painted with a mixture of equal parts of 
tinct. ipecac, and Uq. arsenicalis. Improvement has been 
claimed as the result of giving nicotinic acid in doses of 100 to 
200 mg. daily. 

Gangrenous Stomatitis (Cancrum Oris). — This dangerous 
condition affects small children and is specially prone to occur 
after measles. An ulcer appears on the cheek or gum and the 
surrounding tissues become black and gangrenous. Although 
the temperature is seldom high, death occurs rapidly from 
exhaustion or pulmonary infection. The gangrenous area 
should be excised early and the siurounding tissues 
cauterised. 

Ludwig’s Angina is an acute infection of the floor of the 
mouth, producing marked swelling under the jaw and in the 
neck. The condition develops rapidly, with severe constitu- 
tional symptoms. Treatment consists in early incision and 
drainage. 


Disobdebs of the Sauvaby Geaeds 

Ptyalism, or excessive secretion of saliva, most commonly 
is due to oral sepsis. It may also occur reflezly in trigeminal 
neuralgia or from irritation in the oesophagus or hyperchlor- 
hydria. It may be a prominent feature in post-encephalitic 
Parkinsonian conditions. Drugs, such as iodides and mercury, 
are partially excreted in the saliva, and their administration 
may lead to ptyalism. It is also common in neurotic subjects 
without obvious organic disease. 

Treatment of ptyalism depends on the underl}ring condi- 
tdon, but belladonna or atropine may produce a symptomatic 
improvement. In ptyalism associate with anxiety neuroses 
bromides or phenobarbitone are of value. 



DISEASES OF THE (ESOPHAGUS 


391 


Xerostomia* or deficient secretion of saliva, is usually 
present in the acute fevers, and leads to a dry and septic 
condition of the mouth and tongue. It may occur also in 
diabetes and severe diarrhoea, owing to the large amount of 
fluid lost in the urine and faeces. Atropine and belladonna 
also diminish the secretion of saliva. 

Specific Parotitis* or Mumps . — Vide p. 40. 

Septic Parotitis. — Infection of the parotids may occur in 
any condition in which the mouth is dry and septic as the 
result of prolonged illness, such as typhoid fever and cholera. 
If suppuration occurs, the glands need incision and drainage. 
The condition is often a terminal one. 

Mikulicz’s Disease. — ^This is a rare condition characterised 
by a chronic enlargement of the salivary and lachrymal glands. 
The glands are hard and painless, and the condition is usually 
symmetrical. The aetiology is uncertain. Potassium iodide or 
X-ray therapy are sometimes beneficial. 


DISEASES OF THE (ESOPHAGUS 

Anatomy and Physiology. — The oesophagus extends from 
the termination of the pharynx at the lower border of the 
cricoid cartilage to the cardiac orifice of the stomach. Its 
average length in an adult is 10 in., but more important from 
the clinical point of view is the distance from the front 
teeth to the cardiac orifice, which is usually about 18 in. The 
relations of the oesophagus are important, as surrounding 
structures may be involved in disease of the organ, or, 
conversely, pathological conditions in the neighbourhood of 
the oesophagus may produce obstruction of its lumen. 

From its commencement in the neck the oesophagus lies 
immediately behind and in close contact with the trachea, 
while the recurrent laryngeal nerves he in the grooves between 
the two on either side. In the thorax the oesophagus passes 
through the superior and posterior mediastina, crossed by the 
left bronchus at the level of the fifth dorsal vertebra. On passing 
an oesophagoscope two well-defined constrictions are encountered, 
one the crico -pharyngeal sphincter at the level of the sixth cervical 
vertebra, the other the passage through the diaphragm at the level 
of the tenth dorsal vertebra, CJarcinomata and strictures caused 
by corrosives are frequently seen at the level of the fifth dorsal 
vertebra, where the left bronchus crosses the oasophagus. There 
is evidently a functional delay at this level. The arch of the aorta 
lies in relation to the left side of the oesophagus. 



392 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

Unlike other parts of the alimentary canal, the mucous 
membrane of the oesophagus is sensitive to thermal stimuli ; 
if hot or cold fluids be drunk or passed into the oesophagus 
through a rubber tube, a sensation of heat or cold is felt deep 
in the chest or epigastrium. At the point where the oesophagus 
enters the stomach is the cardiac sphincter, which is normally 
closed. Relaxation of the sphincter follows the swallowing 
reflex. Derangement of the neuromuscular control may 
prevent relaxation of the sphincter, resulting in a condition 
which will be described under the term achalasia of the eardia. 


(Esophagitis and (Esophageal Ulcer 

Acute oesophagitis may follow swallowing of hot or corrosive 
fluids or the impaction of a foreign body. Chronic oesophagitis, 
often with superficial erosions of the mucous membrane, occurs 
in achalasia of the eardia {vide p. 394). It may also be due to 
oral sef)sis and alcoholism. 

Although peptic ulceration of the lower end of the ooso* 
phagus has been descriled it is probable that in nearly all 
instances the condition arises as a complication of a congenital 
short cesophagiis and thoracic stomach {vide p. 420). 


(Esophageal Obstruction 

Practically all the pathological conditions of the oesophagus 
which are commonly met with show as their most prominent 
symptom difficulty in swallowing, known as dysphagia. The 
causes of oesophageal obstruction may Ix^ classified as 
follows : — 

1. Malignant stricture of the oesophagus. 

2. Non-malignant stricture. 

(а) Impaction of a foreign body in the oesophagus. 

(б) Cicatricial stenosis following trauma. 

(c) Gumma (excessively rare). 

{d) Peptic ulcer of the oesophagus. 

(e) Cbngenital stricture. 

(/) (lironic hypopharyngitis associated with 
Plummer-Vinson syndrome {vide p. 359). 

3. Derangement of the neuromuscular mechanism. 

Achalasia of the eardia. 



393 


DISEASES OF THE (ESOPHAGUS 

4. Pressure upon the oesophagus from without. 

(а) Goitre. 

(б) Aortic aneuiysm and mediastinal tumours. 

(c) Pharyngeal diverticulum. 

(d) Diaphragmatic hernia. 

5. Hysterical dysphagia. 

In addition to the above, dysphagia may result from 
pathological conditions in the mouth and pharynx, such as 
growths of the tongue, tonsillitis, or retropharyngeal abscess. 
Palatal and pharyngeal paralysis may produce dysphagia, as, 
for example, in diphtheria, bulbar palsy, or myasthenia gravis. 

Carcinoma of the (Esophagus 

This is the most frequent cause of dysphagia in patients 
over middle age. The onset is insidious ; at first there is 
nothing beyond an occasional tendency for solid food “ to 
stick in the throat.’* This symptom, after intermissions lasting 
many weeks, becomes more frequent, until it is found impossible 
to swallow solids. Later there is difficulty even with fluids, 
and ultimately nothing can be taken at all. Attempts to 
swallow result in regurgitation, but as a rule pain is strikingly 
absent, though occasionally pain in the chest may be an early 
symptom. Death usually occurs from bronchopneumonia. 
Occasionally pressure on surrounding structures such as the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve produces a paralysis of the larynx 
with aphonia, which may occur before any dysphagia is noted. 

Carcinoma of the oesophagus most commonly occurs in three 
situations : at the junction of the pharynx and oesophagus, at 
the point where the oesophagus is slightly narrowed by the 
crossing of the left bronchus, and at the cardiac orifice. As 
a rule the patient is able from his subjective sensations to 
localise fairly accurately the site of the obstruction. 

Although it is usually easy to diagnose a growth of the 
oesophagus on clinical grounds in view of the age of the patient, 
the history of the gradual onset of the dysphagia, and the 
rapid emaciation, the diagnosis can be readily confirmed by 
furiJier investigations. The most valuable of these is an 
X-ray examination, in which the patient is given a thick 
barium emulsion. If a fluid emulsion is used, carcinoma in 
an early stage may easily be overlooked. The patient is 
examin^ erect in the left lateral position, and the opaque 
meal is watched during its passage through the oesophagus. 
Irregularity in the lumen of the oesophagus and partial or 



394 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

complete obstruction are readily demonstrated. Incidentally, 
an X-ray examination may reveal pathological conditions 
of other organs, such as an aortic aneurysm, which might 
produce dysphagia. The growth can be viewed through an 
cesophagoscope, and a piece removed for histological section 
if required. On no account should a bougie be passed. Quite 
apart from the possible though improbable perforation of an 
aortic aneurysm, there is a very grave risk of perforating the 
oesophageal wall immediately above the growth. 

Occasionally a carcinoma of the stomach near the cardiac 
orifice may produce dysphagia as an early symptom. Such cases 
may be misdiagnosed as oesophageal growths, but X-ray examina- 
tion and oesophagoscopy will settle the diagnosis. Early growths 
near the cardia have occasionally been removed successfully. 

Unfortunately the treatment of carcinoma of the oesophagus 
is palliative and death usually results within two years or less 
of the onset of symptoms. If the obstruction is complete a 
gastrostomy is performed, but life subsequently is a misery. 
With incomplete obstruction various palliative measures are 
available, which in most cases enable the patient to sw^allow 
moderately satisfactorily. These include deep X-ray therapy, 
implantation of radon seeds, surgical diathermy and intubation 
with Souttar’s tube. These treatments may be used singly 
or in combination. Successful excision of the oesophagus for 
carcinoma has been reported. 

Non-Malignant Stricture of the QSsophagus. — This condition 
most commonly follows the swallowing of corrosive fluids, 
either accidentally or with suicidal intent. The cicatricial 
stricture which develops is treated by dilatation. The patient 
swallows a silk thread, which passes through the stricture into 
the jejunum. A special metal dilator is threaded on the silk, and 
with the latter acting as a guide, enters and dilates the stricture. 
Dilatation must be repeated at intervals. Strictures may also 
be dilated under direct vision through an cesophagoscope. 

Obstruction of the oesophagus by a foreign body must be 
relieved at the earliest ]:x)S8ible moment by removal through 
an oesophagoecojK?. No attempts at “ blind ” removal by 
coin-catchers or similar implements should be made, as there 
is grave danger of perforating the oesophagus. 

Achalasia of the Cardia 

This type of dysphagia was in the past known as 
cardiospasm, on the assumption that it was due to spasm 
of the cardiac sphincter. The term achalasia was introduced 






I’l \ I r I :« 

ArliaKisM of r fi'- < aKlia, -hou I riLT t h#- j/n a » I \. *li iat< « i ,» fa 1 ♦ )< aij/a to* j - • -< » j .K.* j ii - . 
(Fiofii iilni F\ Dr I*, fl HtlU / 


j '!'n Juft .‘{‘t."*. 


395 


DISEASES OF THE (ESOPHAGUS 

by Hurst to indicate that the obstruction, which undoubtedly 
exists, is due to a failure to relax rather than to increased tone. 
The condition is not uncommon, and in young patients is the 
most frequent cause of obstruction at the lower end of the 
oesophagus. 

Pathology , — No organic obstruction is found at the cardiac 
sphincter, and the muscle fibres in this region show no signs 
of any hypertrophy. Normally, a peristaltic wave passing 
down the oesophagus is accompanied by relaxation of the 
sphincter. It has been suggested that in achalasia this does 
not occur, and the swallowed food is retained in the oesophagus. 
This is enormously dilated and hypertrophied in every case 
whatever the duration of the symptoms. This suggests that 
dilatation of the oesophagus is an essential part of the pathology 
of this condition. The failure of the cardia to relax is probably 
due to some derangement, functional or organic, in the neuro- 
muscular tissue known as Auerbach’s plexus. In long-standing 
cases the irritation produced by stagnating food produces 
oesophagitis. 

Symptoms , — The condition is often sudden in onset, with 
occasional remissions lasting for weeks, months or 3 ^ears. The 
patient feels the food stick at a point which he locates at the 
lower end of the sternum, and, though he does not complain of 
pain, there is a feeling of discomfort and fullness in the chest 
due to the filled oesophagus. Food is usually regurgitated 
soon after a meal, but there is no nausea or retching, and the 
vomited material consists of whatever has been eaten, without 
admixture of bile or hydrochloric acid. When a considerable 
amount of food or drink is taken, the weight of the column of 
fluid in the oesophagus, when the patient is standing erect, is 
usually sufficient to force some of the food through the spliincter. 
Undernutrition results in loss of weight, though, in contrast to 
cases of carcinoma, the general condition of the patient remains 
fairly good. The symptoms may last for many years with 
remissions, though the r^iological appearances remain constant 
regardless of changes in the symptomatology. 

Diagnosis , — Although the symptoms and history may 
strongly suggest achalasia, the diagnosis should be confirmed 
radiologically. X-ray shows a greatly dilated oesophagus with 
vigorous peristaltic waves ; the lower end of the oesophagus 
has a perfectly regular outline, which is quite different in 
appearance from the irregularity which is usually seen even in 
an early carcinoma (see Plates 12 and 13). 

TreatmeffU . — Dilatation of the sphincter can be effected 
out by passing a mercury tube. This consists of a rubber 



396 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 


tube about the thickness of a forefinger, which is closed at both 
ends and contains mercury in the lumen. The tube is both 
heavy and flexible and readily passes through the cardia, 
which it stretches. The patient should be taught to swallow 
the tube himself and for a time should use it before each meal. 
There is often a striking symptomatic improvement and the 
use of the tube can be discontinued. When there is much 
oesophagitis, lavage with normal saline is advisable. In very 
intractable cases in which the mercury tube fails to pass through 
the cardia owing to kinking of the oesophagus, the cardiac 
orifice may be dilated manually when the stomach has been 
opened at a laparotomy. 

Inhalation of amyl nitrite or nitroglycerine gr.) 

dissolved under the tongue produce a transitory relaxation of 
the cardia. 

Pressure on the (Esophagus from Without 

Dysphagia due to aortic aneurysm or mediastinal tumour 
is rare and other symptoms usually point to the correct 
diagnosis. 

Diverticula of the (Esophagus. — What is sometimes described 
as a puLsion diverticulum of the oesophagus is really a pharjn- 
geal pouch, which emerges in the posterior median line of the 
hyi3opharynx between the oblique and transverse portions 
of the inferior constrictor muscles. As the pouch enlarges it 
extends down into the posterior mediastinum, and by pressure 
on the oesophagus produces dysphagia. Food is often re- 
gurgitated when the pouch fills. The diagnosis is readily made 
with an opaque meal and X-rays, or by examination with the 
oesophagoscope. Where the symptoms are severe, pulsion 
diverticula may be removed surgically. 

Traction diverticula are extremely rare and seldom cause 
symptoms. They are thought to be caused by adhesions of 
the oesophagus to surrounding structures, such as a ttiberculous 
gland. 


Hysterical Dysphagu 

An alleged inability to swallow is sometimes encountered 
in hysterical patients. Occasionally it is associated with an 
idea that a foreign body is lodged in the throat. The patient 
usuaUy complains of a lump in the neck, the so-called globus 
hystericus. In this Uqje of case solids are sometimes more 
easily swallowed than fluids, a condition which m not likely 



DISEASES OF STOMACH AND DUODENUM 397 


to be present in a dysphagia due to any organic lesion. The 
passage of the heavy mercury tube may be useful in demon- 
strating to the patient that there is no blockage of the gullet, 
though, in addition, treatment of the general condition by 
psychotherapy is, of course, necessary. 


DISEASES OF THE STOMACH AND DUODENUM 

Although the diagnosis of gastric and duodenal lesions can 
often be made with fair certainty on the strength of a careful 
history of the symptoms and a physical examination, various 
clinical investigations are available which are of the greatest 
value in helping to conjfirm a clinical diagnosis. These are 
(1) X-ray examination ; (2) fractional test meal ; (3) examina- 
tion of faeces for occult blood ; (4) gastroscopy. 

X-ray Examination. — Radiology is the most valuable of all 
special methods employed in the diagnosis of lesions in the 
upper alimentary tract. X-ray examination of the stomach 
with an opaque mead gives valuable information as regards 
(1) the motility of the stomach and its rate of emptying; (2) 
the presence of organic lesions -such as chronic peptic ulcer, 
hour-glass constriction, or carcinoma. The first part of the 
duodenum is visualised as a triangular shadow just above and 
to the right of the pyloric end of the stomach and is known as 
the “ duodenal cap ” from its shape. An X-ray diagnosis of 
duodenal idcer may be made on persistent irre^arity in the 
outline of the “ cap,” which in such cases is often tender on 
palpation. 

In radiological examinations of the stomach and duodenum 
fluoroscopic examination by a competent radiologist is essential 
and is of greater value than the taking of X-ray films. 

In patients liable to constipation a mass of barium in the 
rectum may form a ball- valve obstruction which may necessitate 
manual removal under an anaesthetic. Plenty of paraffin should 
be given as early as possible after the radiological examination 
is completed in order to obviate this distressing result of a barium 
meal. 

Fractional Test Meals. — The patient, after fasting from the 
previous night, swallows a Ryle’s tube. All the gastric contents 
are aspirated and measured ; the fluid obtained is know n as 
the resting juice. A pint of fine oatmeal gruel is now swallowed 
with the tube still in position, and about 15 c.c. is aspirated 
at quarter-hourly intervals for about three hours or until no 
more can be obtained. 



S»8 DISEASES OF THE AL IM ENTARY CANAL 

The specimens, including the resting juice, are examined 
macroscopically for the presence of blood and bUe, and the 
percentage of free acid and the total acidity are estimated 
quantitatively, the results being plotted on a chart as shown 
in Fig. 7. The variations in the percentage of firee acid in 
normal persons are considerable and range from complete 
absence of free acid to extreme degrees of hjrperchlorhydria. 
The specimens are also tested for the presence of starch and 



Fio. 7 

Fractional test meal chart. The shaded area represents the limits of 
free HCl in 80 per cent, of normal persons. 


sugar, and the point at which these disappear is noted, as tiiis 
in&cates the time at which the meal has left the stomach. 
If the resting juice exceeds 50 c.c. or contains food debris, 
starch, or sugar in appreciable quantities, pyloric obstruction 
is probable. Pus or blood in the resting juice is suggestive 
of gastric carcinoma. 

The acidity, both free and total, will depend on a number of 
factors, such as the rate and amount of gastric secretion, the 
rate of passage of the stomach contents into the duodenum, 
and the regurgitation of fluid from the duodentun into the 
stomach. The tendency of the percentage of acid to fall after 
about one and a half hours is due to neutralisation by alkaline 



DISEASES OP STOMACH AND DUODENUM 399 

regurgitation from the duodenum, which is a feature of the 
normal digestive process. 

The fractional test meal is of value in the diagnosis of 
carcinoma ; in this condition the free hydrochloric acid is 
usually absent or diminis hed, and blood may be present both 
in the resting juice and in the subsequent specimens. Obstruc- 
tion of the pylorus by a cicatrising duodenal ulcer produces 
an acid curve which rises steadily and remains high after several 
horns. With duodenal ulcer the resting juice is often highly 
acid, and after a preliminary fall due to dilution on drinking 
the meal the subsequent specimens show a rapidly rising acidity 
with an increased rapidity of the passage of the meal out of the 
stomach. Normally the stomach should be empty, as judged 
by the absence of starch and sugar, within about two and a 
quarter hours. Ulcers of the body of the stomach do not as 
a rule exhibit any typical type of test meal curve. 

Even when no free acid is present in any of the specimens 
of gastric juice withdrawn, hypodermic injection of ^ milli- 
gramme of histamine may sometimes stimulate a secretion of 
acid. When histamine fails to produce any acid the patient is 
said to have achylia gastrica rather than achlorhydria. Nearly 
all patients with pernicious anaemia show gastric achylia. 
After gastro-jejunostomy oi)erations, achlorhydria is frequently 
present owing to the neutralisation of the gastric juice by 
alkaline secretion from the duodenum. 

Occult Blood in the Faeces. — The patient must not take 
any meat, fish, or green vegetables for at least three days 
before the test. Provided bleeding from the gums is excluded, 
the finding of occult blood indicates bleeding from the 
alimentary tract. The examination should include a guaiac or 
benzidene test and spectroscopic examination for haemato- 
porphyrin and acid haematin. The finding of haematoporph} rin 
shows that the bleeding is from the upper alimentary tract, 
and when acid haematin is present the amount of bleeding is 
considerable, as for example, in gastric carcinoma. 

Gastroscopy. — The introduction of the Schindler flexible 
gastroscope in 1932 has been of great value in relation to both 
the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the stomach. With 
this instrument the greater part of the stomach can be 
visualised and the discomfort to the patient is almost 
negligible. 

The gastroscope is an aid to diagnosis in (1) shallow gastric 
ulcers and erosions, which the X-ray fails to visualise ; (2) 
inflammatory or ulcerative conditions around a gastro- jejunal 
stoma ; (3) chronic gastritis with or without erosions. Thus 



400 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

it may be of great vcdue in revealing the cause of hssmatemesis 
in cases where the X-ray findings have been negative. 

Gastroscopy is also of value in controlling the medical 
treatment of gastric ulcer. Even when the X-ray no longer 
shows a crater and occult blood has disappeared from Sie 
faeces, the gastroscope may reveal that the ulcer is not yet 
completely healed and that several further weeks of strict 
treatment are required. 

Unfortunately duodenal ulcers are not visible through the 
gastroscope, nor is the instrument of much value in deciding 
whether an ulcer is innocent or malignant. Negative gastro- 
scopie findings may be, however, of great value in excluding 
organic disease of the stomach in doubtful cases. Needless to 
say, the gastroscope is only of value in the hands of one who 
has had considerable experience. 


ORGANIC DISEASES OP THE STOMACH 
AND DUODENUM 

Acute Gastritis 

Acute Gastritis. — This affection is so common that there 
can be but few readers who have not had personal experience 
of it. The most frequent causes are excessive consumption 
of alcohol or the eating of food that has undergone decomposi- 
tion as the result of bacterial action. As a rule epigastric 
discomfort rather than pain, nausea, a furred tongue and 
vomiting are the most prominent features. In mild attacks 
fever is absent, but in more severe cases, especially in those 
due to food poisoning, the temperature may raised. If the 
intestines be involved, as is often the case, diarrhcea occurs. 
This is particularly hkely to be so in infants. During the 
acute stage the patient has marked anorexia. The vomit 
contains no free acid, but there is considerable excess of mucus. 
The gastric contents are often retained in the stomach for an 
abnormally long period. Attacks of acute gastritis may 
undoubtedly be provoked by chill, especially in the tropics. 
The treatment of gastritis due to food poisoning is described 
elsewhere {vide p. 263). A tepid drink containing a drachm 
of sodium bicarbonate will often provoke vomiting and give 
relief. Most cases cure themselves, as abstinence from food 
for some hours is usually all that is required for a return to 
normal. Kaolin (i to 1 oz.) is often beneficial. 

Acute gastritis also occurs in acute infections, such as 



ORGANIC DISEASES OE THE STOMACH 40l 

scarlet fever and influenza, particularly at the onset of the 
disease. 

Acute Phlegmonous Gastritis. — This condition results from 
the swallowing of corrosive poisons such as strong acids or 
alkalis. The mucous membrane may be completely destroyed. 
There is intense pain, with vomiting and collapse ; in severe 
cases death occurs rapidly. H recovery takes place, cicatricial 
stenosis of the pylorus may occur. 

Chronic Gastritis 

Whereas in the past chronic gastritis was only regarded as 
common among alcoholics, it is now becoming more widely 
recognised that the condition is an extremely frequent one, 
especially in persons of over middle age. Apart ifrom its 
symptoms, the presence of gastritis may be determined by the 
fractional test meal, X-ray examination, and the gastroscope. 
In chronic gastritis the acidity is low, and often no free 
hydrochloric acid is present in any of the specimens in a 
fractional test meal, which, however, usually contain an excess 
of mucus. With expert radiological technique the rugse of 
the stomach can be shown to be thickened and irregular. 

The symptoms of chronic gastritis are usually characteristic. 
Morning anorexia, nausea, and vomiting are prominent features. 
The vomit consists only of swallowed mucus and saliva, and is 
small in amoimt. The appetite and digestion improve as the 
day wears on, and by the evening the patient usually feels 
fairly fit. Sometimes there may be a sensation of fullness and 
discomfort in the epigastrium, but this seldom amounts to 
real pain. The tongue is thickly furred. 

The conditions which commonly predispose to the develop- 
ment of chronic gastritis are given below : — 

1. Alcohol taken regularly in considerable amount. 

2. Faulty habits as regards feeding, e.( 7 ., hurried meals; 
defective mastication ; excessive tea, coffee, or tobacco. 

3. Septic conditions in mouth or nasopharynx. 

4. Congestion of the gastric mucous membrane in chronic 
heart disease. 

5. Chronic infections, particularly phthisis. 

How far chronic gastritis can be regarded as a precursor 
of more serious conditions, such as peptic ulcer and carcinoma, 
remains doubtful. It is certain, however, that acute erosions 
are often present which may cause severe hsemorrhage, and 
quite possibly develop into chronic peptic ulcer. 

Treatment consists in persuading the patient to readjust 
26 



402 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

his daily routine, where this appears to be at fault. Perhaps 
the easiest method of achieving this object is spa treatment, 
where regular habits and diet often work wonders, quite apart 
from the virtues of the waters. Septic teeth or gums must 
be dealt with. Even in oases in which alcohol is not the cause 
of the condition it should be absolutely forbidden, at any rate 
for many months. A gentian and soda mixture (soda bicarb., 
1 5 gr. ; spirit, ammon. aromat., 30 minims ; inf. gent, oo., ad ^ oz.) 
is often useful in stimulating the appetite. When the secretion 
of hydrochloric acid is diminished, acidum hydrochloricum 
dilutum B.P. may be given in doses up to 1 drachm, taken 
with half a pint of sweetened lemonade at meals. In 
intractable cases daily lavage of the stomach before breakfast 
with hydrogen peroxide (1 drachm to a pint of water) may be 
tried. When gastric symptoms are secondary to other diseases, 
such as phthisis or cardiac failure, the treatment is that of the 
primary condition. 

If a further test meal be performed after effective treatment, 
the gastric acidity is often found to have returned. 


H^MATEMESIS 

Although haematemesis is most commonly due to h/emorrhage 
from a gastric or duodenal ulcer, it often results from other 
pathological conditions. The causes of vomiting of blood are 
tabulated below : — 

1. Vomiting of swallowed blood, e.g., following epistaxis. 

2. Bleeding from the oesophagus due to rupture of an 
msophageal varix in cirrhosis, or very rarely to rupture of an 
aortic aneurysm. 

3. Bleeding from the stomach, due to — 

(a) Acute erosion or ulcer. 

(b) Clironic ulcer. 

(c) Dilated veins around cardiac orifice in cirrhosis. 

{d) Carcinoma. 

(e) Irritant poisons, e.g., arsenic. 

if) Severe gastritis and vomiting. 

(g) Gastric polyps and adenomata (rare). 

4. Bleeding from the duodenum due to an acute or chronic 
peptic ulcer. 

5. Hsematemesis in certain acute infective diseases, e,g., 
malaria, yellow fever. 

6. H^matemesis in diseases of the blood, splenic ansBiuia, 
purpura haemorrhagica, scurvy, leukaemia. 



ILEMATEMESIS 


403 


Differential diagnosis of the cause of the haemorrhage is often 
easy from the history of the patient. Symptoms, sometimes 
of long duration, may point to a chronic gastric or duodenal 
ulcer. Severe haemorrhage, however, is not uncommon from an 
acute ulcer or multiple erosions without any previous history of 
dyspepsia. Symptoms of a chronic gastritis, particularly if 
associated with a history of alcoholism, suggest cirrhosis. 
Splenic anaemia may produce copious haematemesis, but the 
much-enlarged spleen and leucopenia render diagnosis easy. 
With haematemesis due to purpura haemorrhagica or leukaemia 
there is also evidence of haemorrhages elsewhere, such as 
ecchymoses in the skin, epistaxis, or bleeding from the gums. 

Sometimes there may be dilficulty in differentiating j^tween 
haematemesis and haemoptysis. The patient’s own sensations 
are a valuable guide, but apart from this, an inspection of the 
material brought up is generally sufficient. With haematemesis 
there are often remnants of food mixed with the blood ; in 
haemoptysis the blood is often frothy and bright red, and 
blood-streaked sputum continues to be coughed up after the 
acute haemoptysis has ceased. 

Treatment of Haematemesis. — It is unwise to carry out any 
thorough physical examination until haematemesis has ceased 
for several days. Palpation of the abdomen is particularly 
to be avoided, as it may dislodge clot and lead to further 
haemorrhage. The immediate treatment required is the same 
irrespective of whether the haemorrhage is due to ulcer, 
cirrhosis or gastritis. 

The first and most important point in the treatment of 
haematemesis is to put the patient at absolute rest ; strict 
confinement to bed with the head unsupported by a pillow is 
essential ; all visitors or disturbance of any kind must be 
absolutely forbidden. As soon as possible ^ gr. of morphia 
must be given hypodermically, and this shoidd be repeated at 
four- or six -hourly intervals as long as there is any restlessness 
or continuance of haemorrhage, as judged by a rising pulse 
rate and a falling blood pressure. Atropine gr. sliould 
also be given, as this drug diminislies the secretion of acid 
and also helps to prevent oedema of the lungs. 

As the patient is usually shocked and dehydrated, the 
mouth is very dpr and should be carefully cleaned at frequent 
intervals to diminish the risk of parotitis. The patient’s pulse 
should be charted hourly and the blood pressure estimated 
at le^t thrice daily. A rising pulse and falling blood pressure 
are indications that bleeding has not ceased, even though 
there may have been no further hmmatemesis. A blood count 



404 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

should be done and the blood group determined even in 
mild cases. 

Indications for Transfiision . — ^It is impossible to lay down 
any hard-and-fast rules as to when blood transfusion is 
necessary. The percentage of haemoglobin is of little aid as, 
especially during the first forty-eight hours, it may remain 
quite high even though the amount of blood lost has been 
very large. The haemoglobin often continues to faU after 
haemorrhage has ceased, as the blood volume is made up to 
normal by fluid from the tissues. The main indications for 
transfusion are severe shock and collapse, a pulse rate rising 
to 120 or above, and a systolic blood pressure falling to 
100 mm. or below. Intravenous saline or gum should not be 
given unless it is impossible to do a blood transfusion. A 
series of small transfusions of not more than 10 oz. each given 
slowly are preferable to larger transfusions, but probably the 
safest method is a continuous drip transfusion, which enables 
blood to be given over a period of many hours or even days. 

Operation is almost always contraindicated during or 
immediately after haematemesis. If the bleeding is due to 
an acute ulcer or erosion, no surgical procedure can be of any 
avail, while the immediate operative mortality is necessarily 
high. Very rarely when a chronic peptic ulcer is known to be 
present and appears to have eroded an artery, bleeding con- 
tinues in spite of all medical measures, and operation may be 
tried as a last resort. In such cases preliminary blood trans- 
fusion by the continuous drip method is essential. Naturally 
a severe hsematemesis is most alarming both to the patient 
and his relatives, and the medical attendant must firmly refuse 
to allow himself to be persuaded into recommending operation 
except in very special cases. 

Dietetic Treatment , — Until recent years it was customary 
to give neither solids nor fluids by mouth until haemorrhage 
had ceased for forty -eight hours. As bleeding not infrequently 
recurred this fKdicy was often productive of dehydration and 
inanition, which rectal salines did little to counteract. Meulen- 
gracht, believing that many of the deaths from haemorrhage 
were due to toxaemia and exhaustion dependent on dehydration 
and starvation, advocated early feeding of these patients 
with a practically full diet of high caloric value and ample 
vitamin content. In Great Britain few physicians follow 
Meulengracht in allowing meat and fish in the early days of 
treatment but there has been an increasing tendency to shorten 
or abolish the period of initial starvation. Thus Witts advocates 
on the first day two -hourly feeds of egg and mUk with vegetable 



GASTRIC AND DUODENAL ULCER 406 

puree and orange juice. On subsequent days solids such as 
crustless bread and butter, rusks and milk puddings are added. 
Although statistics on gastro-duodenal haemorrhage are notori- 
ously variable, there is every reason to believe that early and 
adequate feeding has lower^ the death rate and accelerated 
convalescence. 

An antacid such as magnesium trisilicate (15 gr.) should 
be given between feeds. When bleeding has ceased 20 minims 
of a saturated solution of iron and ammonium citrate should be 
taken thrice daily in milk. 

Melsena. — By melaena is meant sufficient altered blood in 
the faeces to render them black and tarry in consistency. 
Following a severe haematemesis there is always some degree 
of melaena. With haemorrhage from a duodenal, gastro- jejunal, 
or jejunal ulcer melaena is a more frequent occurrence t^n is 
haematemesis. The amount of blood shed into the intestine 
may be very large and when the bleeding occurs rapidly the 
patient may become collapsed and unconscious witldn a few 
minutes. The treatment of melaena is similar to that of 
haematemesis. Patients with melaena often have slight pyrexia, 
probably due to decomposing blood in the intestines. 

Prognosis. — Comparatively few patients under middle age 
die directly as a result of haemorrhage from a peptic ulcer. 
When death does occur it is usually due to recurrent or per- 
sistent bleeding from an artery exposed in the floor of an ulcer. 
The outlook is worst in elderly patients vith arteriosclerosis. 
Estimates of the mortality in cases of haemorrhage are remark- 
ably conflicting and vary from about 2 per cent, to about 25 
per cent. There is no evidence that early surgical treatment 
has better results than medical. 


GASTRIC AND DUODENAL ULCER 

Although there are striking differences between gastric and 
duodenal ulcers, particularly as regards their symptomatology, 
it is permissible to consider them together, as their pathology 
and their medical treatment are very similar if not identical. 
The frequency of peptic ulcer, under which term are included 
both gastric dnd duodenal ulcer, appears to have increased 
very greatly during the past thirty years. To some extent 
the apparent increase is due to better facilities for diagnosis, 
but there can be no doubt that there has also been a real 
increase, especially in the firequency of duodenal ulcer. Probably 
an important factor is the general “ speeding-up of life during 



406 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

the present century, with its encroachments on the more 
placid atmosphere of the Victorian era. 

It is unnecessary to consider in detail the statistics of age 
and sex incidence of peptic ulcer. Duodenal ulcer is at least 
three times more common in males than in females, and gastric 
ulcer is relatively more frequent in females. As the onset is 
usually very insidious it is often difficult to be certain at what 
age the disease really started, but severe symptoms from 
peptic ulcers are more common above the age of forty than 
in earlier life. Occasionally there is a striking incidence of 
duodenal ulcer among the members of a family. 

Pathogenesis. — In spite of the great amount of experimental 
work that has been carried out on the pathology of peptic 
ulcer, it must be admitted that the cause of the condition is 
still undecided. The one outstanding fact is that peptic ulcers 
only occur in those parts of the alimentary canal in which 
gastric juice is present. This includes the stomach, the first 
part of the duodenum, and, in cases where a gastro-jejunostomy 
has been performed, the first few inches of jejunum from the 
point where it is sutured to the stomach. The natural inference 
from this is that the gastric juice or perhaps its hydrochloric 
acid is in some way responsible. Although gastric juice is 
unable to digest the normal mucous membrane of the stomach, 
it is possible that if this becomes devitalised either by trauma, 
toxins or local circulatory disturbances, digestion of an area 
of mucous membrane may occur, leading to the formation of 
an acute ulcer. Although hydrochloric acid is not necessarily 
present in excess in all cases of peptic ulcer, there is usually 
some degree of hyperchlorhydria, particularly in duodenal 
ulcer, and it may be that it is the presence of fiw hydrochloric 
acid which prevents the healing of an acute ulcer. The 
importance of focal infection as a cause of peptic ulcer remains 
undecided. Much stress has recently been laid upon the fact 
that the symptoms of peptic ulcer firequently follow emotional 
disturbances and anxiety, and it has even been maintained 
that emotional factors are of prime importance in the develop- 
ment of peptic ulceration. Although it is undoubtedly true 
that paj-'chological factors are of great importance, it is difficult 
to imagine that they play more than a contributory part in 
the genesis of ulcer. 

Examination of portions of the stomach removed at opera- 
tion in cases of gastric ulcer show that quite apart from the 
ulcer there are inflammatory changes in the mucous membrane. 
These conges may be acute gastritis, sometimes with small 
superficial erosions or a chronic hypertrophic gastritis. Gastro- 



GASTRIC AND DUODENAL ULCER 407 

scopic examination also shows that gastritis is often present 
in cases of peptic nicer. It is possible that gastritis may be a 
predisposing factor in the formation of chronic peptic ulcer. 

Hurst has pointed out that duodenal ulcer is especially 
common in individuals with the hypertonic type of stomach, 
which is usually accompanied by hypersecretion of gastric 
juice and a rapid rate of emptying. The prevalence of this 
type of stomach in males would help to explain the relative 
frequency of duodenal ulcer in the male sex. 

Symptoms of Gastric Ulcer. — Gastric ulcers may be acute 
or chronic, and the symptoms of the two conditions are so 
different that they merit separate descriptions. 

1. Acute Ulcers . — ^Little is known of the morbid appearances 
of acute ulcers, as death rarely occurs. They are usually 
multiple, and consist of small erosions which, as a rule, do 
not extend further than through the mucous membrane 
and submucous layer. Often they are associated with no 
symptoms unless erosion of a vessel produces haematemesis. 
Occasionally perforation into the peritoneum may occur. 
Cases of severe haematemesis or perforation without preliminary 
gastric symptoms are usually due to an acute ulcer. In any 
case, it is doubtful whether the condition can be diagnosed 
chnically in the absence of these complications. Acute ulcers 
are probably an integral part of a chronic gastritis. 

2. Chronic Ulcers . — The three classical symptoms of chronic 
gastric ulcer are pain, vomiting, and haematemesis. Needless 
to say, the last is often absent. The history is extremely 
important and the diagnosis may often be made from it alone. 
The onset is usually gradual, and though remissions occur 
they are seldom of long duration. The pain is situated in the 
epigastrium, and when the ulcer is in an active condition it 
occurs with absolute regularity at a fixed time after a meal. 
In gastric ulcer the onset of the pain is from half an hour to 
one and a half hours after food ; the nearer the ulcer is to the 
pylorus, the later the onset of pain. The pain usually dis- 
appears spontaneously after an hour or two and is quickly 
relieved by a dose of alkali such as sodium bicarbonate. 
Temporary reUef is sometimes obtained by taking food, but 
the pain soon recurs. The patient may have difficulty in 
getting to sleep owing to pain, but once he has done so is 
rarely awakened by it. The type of pain varies, but is usually 
burning in character and may extend through to the back. 
In most cases nausea accompanies the pain, and vomiting of 
partially digested food usuaUy gives relief. Only a small propor- 
tion of patients have hcematemesis, but occult blood is practically 



408 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

always found in the faeces when symptoms are present. Some 
patients with ulcers, whether gastric, duodenal, or gastro- 
jejunal, seem to have a tendency to repeated haemorrhages, and 
in such cases pain is often slight or even absent. 

On examining the abdomen there is tenderness on deep 
pressure in the epigastrium, particularly just to the left 
of the midhne. This is most obvious when there is 
spontaneous pain at the time of the examination. Rigidity 
is unusual unless the ulcer is involving the peritoneum, and 
a palpable tumour is very rare and suggests carcinoma 
rather than ulcer. 

A test meal usually gives little help in the diagnosis unless 
pyloric obstruction is present. X-ray examination should 
demonstrate an ulcer in over 90 per cent, of cases. A pro- 
jection or niche is seen filled with the opaque salt, and when 
the ulcer is on the lesser curvature an incisura is often visible, 
due to spasm of the circular muscle fibres. 

Symptoms of Duodenal Ulcer. — These are even more typical 
than those of gastric ulcer. Periods of complete remission of 
symptoms are more marked than in gastric ulcer, and may 
last months or even years. Exacerbations are particularly 
common during the spring and autumn, or when the patient 
is overworked or worried. The pain in duodenal ulcer occurs 
at a longer interval after food than in gastric ulcer, often as 
long as three hours, so that it tends to appear before a meal 
rather than after one, and is often termed “ hunger pain.” 
The appetite is good, but the patient is afraid to eat. Relief 
is obtained as the result of taking food or alkalis. Vomiting 
is rare in duodenal ulcer unless cicatrisation is producing 
pyloric obstruction. The patient is often aw'akened in the 
early hours of the morning by pain, and learns for himself 
that it can be relieved by drinking a glass of milk or eating 
a biscuit. If an artery be eroded, both hfematemesis and 
melaena may occur. Even if there be no visible haemorrhage, 
occult blood is found in the fseces. On palpation of the 
abdomen there is usually deep tenderness in the epigastrium 
slightly to the right of the midline. 

A test meal shows a highly acid resting juice with a rapid 
rise in acidity during the first hour and sometimes a rather 
rapid emptying of the stomach. The X-ray diagnosis of 
duodenal ulcer depends on the demonstration of a deformity 
of the duodenal cap together with local tenderness on palpation 
under the fluorescent screen, 

DiagnosiB of Oastne and Duodenal Ulcer. — A diagnosis has 
to be made bom chronic gastritis, carcinoma of the stomach 



GASTRIC AND DUODENAL ULCER 409 

and cholecystitis. The points to be considered are set out in 
tabular form : — 



Qaatrio 1 
Ulcer. 

Duodenal 

Ulcer. 

Carcinonut. 

Chole- , 
cyatltlf. 

Chronic 

Gastritis. 

Pain— 

Relation to meala 

Mi hrt. 

2-3i hrt. 

Often 

immediate 

Irregular 

Usually 

slight 

Relief by food 

Uncommon i 

Very 

common 

Never 

Variable 

Not 

relieved 

Relief by alkali . 

Usually 

Uaually 

No relief 

Usually 

not 

Not 

relieved 

Appetite 

( 

Moderate 

Good 

Very bad 

Variable 

Bad in 
morning 

Vomiting 

Common 

Very 

rare 

Very 

common 

I'sualiy 

none 

In 

morning 

; Hssmateraeslfl 

Fairly 

common 

Fairly 

common 

Coffee 

grounds 

None 

liare 

Occult blood In 
fwcci 

Constant 

Conatant 

Invariable 

Sometimes 

Some- 

times 

Acid In teat meal 

Normal 

High 

Absent or 
low 

Variable 

Usually 

low 

Lota of weight 

SUgbt 

SUght 

Early and 
marked 

None 

None 


A further point in cholecystitis is local tenderness on palpa- 
tion over the gall-bladder, especially when the patient takes a 
deep inspiration. Although obvious melaena seldom occurs in 
carcinoma, the presence of occult blood in considerable amount 
is invariable. 

Although the symptoms of chronic peptic ulcers, particularly 
duodenal, are usually fairly characteristic, there are many 
occasions on which even a careful consideration of the patient’s 
history and a thorough physical examination fail to point to 
a diagnosis of a peptic ulcer, which may yet be demonstrated 
without doubt by X-ray examination. Conversely, X-ray 
examination may be negative when on clinical grounds an 
ulcer is almost certainly present. 


Complications op Gastric and Duodenal Ulcer 

Haemorrhage and perforation are the two most frequent 
complications of a peptic ulcer, and they may occur both \^ith 
acute and chronic ulcers. Haematemesis has already been 
described {vide p. 403), and perforation is a surgical condition 
which is dealt with in textbooks of surgery. Other important 



410 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 


complications of chronic ulcers are pyloric stenosis and hour- 
glass constriction. In addition there are complications which 
may arise following surgical interference ; these include jejunal 
and gastro-jejimal ulcers, and gastro-colic fistula. 

Hour-glass Constriction. — This rather infrequent complica- 
tion of a gastric ulcer on the lesser curvature is practically 
confined to females. The patient gives a history of attacks of 
indigestion for many years before the more serious symptoms 
of an hour-glass stomach become manifest. As a result of 
cicatrisation the stomach becomes divided into an upper and 
lower pouch with a narrow constriction between the two. 
When there is serious obstruction to the passage of food the 
patient vomits almost immediately after a meal and becomes 
very wasted and cachectic. Abdominal pain is variable. 
Patients with advanced hour-glass constriction are usually 
diagnosed as suffering from carcinoma of the stomach, until 
the correct diagnosis is established by X-ray examination. 
The treatment of the condition is surgical. 

Apart from hour-glass stomach described above, where 
there is an organic stricture, there is another condition, some- 
times termed a spasmodic hour-glass constriction. Here an 
ulcer on the lesser curvature produces a reflex spasm of the 
circular muscle fibres opposite it, and this results in an incisura 
on the greater curvature opposite the site of the ulcer. The 
condition of spasm is temporary and disappears when the 
ulcer heals. Spasmodic hour-glass constriction calls for no 
special treatment apart from that of the ulcer. 

Pyloric Stenosis. — The most frequent cause of pyloric 
stenosis is cicatrisation of a duodenal ulcer. Gastric ulcers 
rarely produce obstruction of the pylorus, but the condition is 
common in carcinomata of the pyloric antrum. 

Pyloric stenosis can, as a rule, be diagnosed with considerable 
certainty from the patient’s symptoms and physical signs. 
The most important symptom is the vomiting of very large 
quantities of fluid, containing food, some of which may be 
recognised as having been eaten many hours or even days 
previously. Vomiting is relatively infrequent, seldom more 
often than once in twenty-four hours, but if the stomach has 
become very dilated and atonic, its contents may be vomited 
only every two or three days. Pain is generally not a striking 
feature unless the obstruction is due to a growth. The 
patient suflers from marked inanition whether the stenosis be 
due to ulcer or growth. Owing to gastric stasis fermentation 
occurs and the eructated gas has a foul odour, particularly 
when the stenosis is due to carcinoma. 



Tlatk I ♦ 

IIour-^lasH const liitKtu of stomach. Tlio arrow imlicalcs “niche" of 
nicer. (Krom plate hy Dr D. .1. l^rigga.) 


[To ftice }xigt tlt». 



GASTRIC AND DUODENAL ULCER 


411 


On physical examination the abdomen often looks strikingly 
distended in contrast to the general wasting. The outline of 
the dilated stomach can usually be seen and waves of peristalsis 
are visible passing across the abdomen from left to right. 
There is also a loud succussion splash. The diagnosis is readily 
confirmed by X-ray examination, which shows very deep and 
powerful peristaltic waves, which start nearer the cardiac end 
of the stomach than they normally do. Re-examination after 
six hours shows most of the opaque meal still remaining in 
the stomach. A fractional test meal gives important informa- 
tion. With a cicatricial stenosis the amount of free acid rises 
steadily in the later specimens, but in obstruction due to a 
carcinoma there is little or no free hydrochloric acid throughout, 
and altered blood is present in considerable amount. 

Patients with pyloric stenosis due to cicatrisation of an 
ulcer usually have a history of duodenal symptoms extending 
over many years. With a carcinomatous obstruction the 
history is a short one. 

In some cases of ulcer near the pylorus, whether gastric 
or duodenal, there may be pylorospasm quite apait from any 
organic stenosis. With strict dietetic treatment, alkali and 
atropine, the spasm may disappear. Although there may be 
definite gastric delay iii such cases no visible peristalsis is seen, 
and the amounts vomited are not as great as they are in true 
pyloric stenosis. Gastro-jejunostomy is inadvisable in pyloro- 
spasm unless there is organic stenosis in addition. 

Oastric Urcemia , — In pyloric stenosis and sometimes in 
peptic ulcer apart from pyloric stenosis, a condition of alkalosis 
may develop giving rise to 85 nnptoms sometimes described as 
gastric uraemia. These are drowsiness, headache, thirst, 
hiccups, twitching, and stupor. The blood urea is high, 
rising to 150 mg. per 100 c.c. or more, and the chlorides 
are decreased. The urine often contains albumen and casts. 
Attacks of tetany may occur but are rare. The condition is a 
dangerous one, particularly if it remains imrecogiiised. The 
administration of alkali must be stopped at once, gastric 
lavage started, and rectal salines given. In severe cases a 
continuous drip intravenous saline is required. Operation 
should be postponed until the blood urea has fallen and 
symptoms have abated. 

TrecUment , — With severe pyloric stenosis, gastro-jejunostomy 
is most successful, but before operation it is wise to wash 
the stomach out daily in an attempt to diminish its size 
and improve its tone. No alkali should be given owing to 
the danger of alkalosis. Even when the stenosis is due to a 



412 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

growth, gaatro-jejunostomy may produce a temporary im- 
provement. 

Jejunal and Gastro-jejonal Ulcer. — ^This is a serious and 
unfortunately relatively common complication following gastro- 
jejunostomy, particularly when this operation has been per- 
formed on a patient with a high gastric acidity. The most 
prominent symptom is pain, which usually comes on soon after 
food and fields much less readily to dietetic and medicinal 
treatment than does the pain of a gastric or duodenal ulcer. 
JMelaena is also frequent and may be extremely severe. A 
majority of jejunal and gastro- jejunal ulcers occur within two 
years of operation, but they may develop after almost any 
length of time. Prolonged and strict medical treatment is 
essential, but often further surgical treatment is eventually 
necessary, which unfortunately is by no means always successful. 

Oastro-colic Fistula. — In this dangerous condition a fistula 
forms between the stomach and the colon, usually following 
gastro-jejunal ulceration. The patient becomes very emaciated 
and suffers from chronic diarrhoea with faeculent eructationa 
The diagnosis should be confirmed by barium meal and 
enema. Operative treatment is essential, but the mortality 
is high. 

Treatment of Gastric and Duodenal Ulcer 

The most important points in the treatment of peptic ulcer 
are physical and mental rest. The former can be attained by 
keeping the patient in bed, though he (^an be allowed to use 
the lavatory and bath. Exclusion of business w^orries and in 
nervous or irritable patients ^ gr. doses of phenobarbitone 
twice a day have a good psychological effect. On such a 
regime, even without special diet or alkalis, symptoms usually 
are rapidly relieved. 

As regards diet there is a wide variation in the practice of 
physicians, ranging from the strict hourly feed diet of Hurst 
to the far more liberal diet advocated originally by Meulen- 
gracht. Probably as satisfactory as any are two-hourly feeds 
of non-irritating non-stimulating character, the basis of which 
is milk and farinaceous food. The calory content must be 
adequate, certainly not less than 2,000 calorics daily, and there 
must also be sufficient protein and vitamins. Obviously food 
containing gross ‘‘ roughage,’’ e.y., cabbage, pips or skins of fruit, 
are inadvisable, as are spices, condiments, and meat extracts 
which induce gastric hypersecretion. Smoking should be 
entirely forbidden during the course of treatment. 




(a) Before treatment. 



(6) After 2 rnonttis 



ir, 

.^riee of three ahowini;; diminution in t>ie aize of 

“ niche under medical treatment. (u) Orijirinal si»e f»f 



GASTRIC AND DUODENAL ULCER 


413 


Hourly feeds are practically impossible except in hospital, 
and it is by no means certain that they have any real advantage 
over feeds at two-hourly intervals. The following scheme of 
diet is usually satisfactory : — 

1. First Week, — Two-hourly feeds of milk, arrowroot, 
Benger’s food, Horlick’s, Ovaltine, cornflour. Sugar should be 
added to taste and the juice of an orange. 

2. Second Week , — Thin white bread and butter with fruit 
jelly, eggs, custards, milk jeUies, potato or vegetable puree 
can be substituted for some of the feeds. 

3. Third and Svbsequent Weeks . — Boiled or steamed fish, 
minced chicken, weak tea can be added to the diet of earlier 
weeks. 

Medicinal Treatment , — Ohve oil to diminish gastric secretion, 
alkalis to neutralise hyperacidity, and atropine as an anti- 
spasmodic have long been employed in the treatment of peptic 
idcer. Whether they are as important as was formerly imagined 
is doubtful. Atropine or belladonna has probably little effect 
in the doses normally employed and may well be omitted during 
routine treatment. If the patient, however, awakes with pain 
during the night gr. of atropine hypodermically last thing 
at night is often helpful. The value of olive oil or cream is 
doubtful, and in any case they are under w^ar conditions 
impracticable. The majority of physicians still give alkalis. 
Probably the two most effective antacids are magnesium 
trisilicate in 15-gr. doses betw'een feeds and colloidal aluminium 
hydroxide in 1 to 2 drachm doses. Neither of these drugs 
produce alkalosis. 

Treatment on the lines given above should be adhered to 
for at least five weeks, even though sjunptoms may have 
completely di8api>eared. The effects of treatment may be 
controlled (1) by X-ray examinations ; (2) by examination 
of the stools for occult blood. In the case of a gastric ulcer, 
the “ niche ” seen with the X-rays often diminishes in size or 
even disappears within a month of strict treatment being 
mstituted, and the occult blood, which at the beginning of 
treatment was w^ell marked, becomes first much reduced and 
finally is completely absent. With duodenal ulcers, deformities 
of the duodenal cap persist for many months or years after 
all symptoms and signs have disappeared. Gastroscopy is 
also of great value in determining whether a gastric ulcer has 
healed completely. 

In addition to dietetic and medicinal treatment, it is 
important to eradicate focal sepsis. The teeth should be 
X-rayed and any found to be infected should be extracted. 



414 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

If pyorrhcBa is present, extraction is usually indicated. 
Infected tonsils should also be dealt with surgically. 

Injections of histidine are of no value. 

A patient who has suffered from chronic gastric or duodenal 
ulcer is very liable to recurrence of his ulcer unless he is very 
careful as to his diet and the general r6gime of life. He must 
avoid overwork and worry, take regular meals and allow himself 
plenty of time to eat them. Alcohol in all forms is best avoided 
for at least a year, and after that period must be taken in only 
very moderate quantities. Anything in the nature of short 
drinks before meals should be permanently forbidden. Smoking 
should be completely stopped for at least six months and 
oversmoking rigorously avoided later. Fresh fruit with skins 
and 'pips are to be avoided, as are condiments such as vinegar 
and mustard, and highly spiced foods. Regular visits should 
be paid to a dental surgeon at not more than six-monthly 
intervals. If there is a tendency to constipation, liquid 
paraffin should be taken. For three months after strict treat- 
ment has ceased it is wise to avoid meat completely, but fish 
and chicken may be allowed. For six months an antacid, such 
as magnesium trisilicate, should be taken with the three main 
meals or if for any reason a meal is missed. In cases of 
duodenal ulcer it is essential to continue permanently to take 
rather small meals, with small intermediate feeds between meals. 
In the event of the return of symptoms, however slight, the 
patient should rest for a few days on a strict diet of milk, in 
small and frequent feeds. Drugs in tablet form, especially 
aspirin, must be crushed before swallowing. 

Indications for Operation. — Perforation calls for immediate 
operation. When haBmorrhage occurs, immediate operation is 
almost invariably contraindicated {vide p. 404). Complications 
such as organic hour-glass constriction, cicatricial pyloric 
stenosis, and gastro-colic fistula cannot be cured by medical 
treatment and are only amenable to surgery. In the case of 
gastric ulcer where there is doubt as to the possibility of 
carcinoma, laparotomy should be performed, but the theoretical 
possibility that carcinoma may develop in a benign ulcer does 
not justify operation. 

Apart firom the oonditions detailed above every patient 
with a peptic ulcer should undergo a strict course of medical 
treatment before operation is even considered. If relapse 
occurs after one or more courses of strict treatment, efficiently 
and conscientiously carried out, the problem becomes a difficult 
one. In such cases, particularly when severe haemorrhage has 
occurred repeatedly, operation may have to be advised. It 



CARCINOMA OF THE STOMACH 


415 


must be remembered that if the patient has a high gastric 
acidity and the stomach empties rapidly the risks of recurrent 
jejunal or gastro-jejunal ulceration are very considerable, if a 
gastro-jejunostomy be performed. The various operative 
procedures for peptic ulceration cannot be discussed here, but 
in general it can be said that gastro-jejunostomy is usually 
extremely successful in cases of pyloric stenosis. A patient 
who relapses after operation is usually more intractable than 
one who has not been operated on, and further operations on 
such patients rarely lead to satisfactory results. 

It must not be imagined that surgical treatment will cure 
a peptic ulcer rapidly. Operation must be regarded merely 
as an incident in the medical treatment, and the patient should 
be instructed to take all the precautions as to diet and mode 
of life which have been detailed above. 

Prognosis. — Acute ulcers, even though haemorrhage or 
perforation may have occurred, usually heal rapidly, and 
provided that all sources of sei)sis and gastritis are eliminated 
recurrence is unusual. 

As regards chronic ulcers, permanent cure, whether by 
medical or surgical treatment, is improbable (1) if the ulcer 
has been present for over five years ; (2) if the patient is over 
fifty years of age ; (3) if his temperament is such that he 
is unlikely to submit to prolonged treatment and certain 
permanent restrictions ; (4) if the environment, economic or 
domestic, is unfavourable. Patients under forty in whom 
symptoms have not been present for more than two years 
have a more favourable prognosis. 

The risk of carcinoma developing in a gastric ulcer is small, 
in a duodenal ixlcer none. Surgery is extremely successful in 
pyloric stenosis or hour-glass stomach, and in these conditions 
permanently good results are claimed in 80 to 90 per cent, of 
cases. Complications such as jejunal ulcer or gastro-jejunal 
ulcer always have a bad prognosis, and permanent invalidism 
is a frequent sequel whether such cases are treate<i by medical 
or surgical means. 


CARCINOMA OF THE STOMACH 

Carcinoma is practically the only malignant growth wliich 
occurs in the stomach, though occasionally sarcomata have 
been described. It is most fit>quent between the ages of forty 
and sixty, but may occasionally be encountered below thirty. 
The disease is more common in males than in females. 



416 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

It has been maintained that caroinoma of the stomach 
frequently originates in a chronic gastric ulcer. This view 
finds little support among clinicians. Were it true that any 
considerable proportion of oases of gastric carcinoma had their 
origin in chronic peptic ulcers, it would be reasonable to assume 
that, in the previous history of patients with caroinoma, there 
would be symptoms indicating gastric ulceration extending, 
at any rate, over a number of years. This, however, is certainly 
not the case. Actually it is rare for patients with a long history 
of chronic dyspeptic symptoms to develop carcinoma. On the 
contrary, the di^ase much more commonly occurs in those 
whose digestion has been perfect until the onset of sjTnptoms 
of carcinoma. A further strong argument against ulcer being 
a cause of carcinoma is the fact, granted by all, that cancer is 
almost unknown in the duodenum, although this is a much 
more common situation for peptic ulcer than is the stomach. 
Moreover, carcinomata of the stomach most often involve the 
prepyloric region, whereas simple ulcer chiefl}'^ occurs about 
the middle of the lesser curvature. A possible explanation of 
the frequency of gastric cancer and its failure ever to occur 
in the duodenum, may lie in the fact that the gastric mucosa 
is often affected by ci^onic gastritis and is far more liable to 
trauma from the ingestion of hard fragments of food or very 
hot drinks ; by the time these reach the duodenum they have 
been diluted by the remainder of the gastric contents and are 
cooled to body temperature. 

It cannot be stated dogmatically that carcinoma never 
originates in an ulcer ; in fact, probably some 10 per cent, of 
gastric carcinomata result from malignant changes in chronic 
ulcers. Taking the evidence as a whole, however, there is 
certainly no justification for the idea that a patient with gastric 
ulcer is specially liable to develop carcinoma. 

Carcinoma may occur in any part of the stomach, but, as 
stated above, the commonest site is in the pyloric antrum ; 
growths starting on the greater curvatiure are very uncommon, 
but they sometimes occur at the cardiac end of the stomach 
and involve the lower end of the oesophagus. Originating in 
the mucous membrane, the growth rapidly invades the whole 
of the stomach wall, and metastases in the glands along the 
lesser curvature are an early occurrence. Later, secondary 
deposits occur in the liver, peritoneum, and elsewhere, leading 
to great enlargement of the liver, ascites, and sometimes 
jaundice. 

Occasionally carcinomata involve practically the whole of 
the stomach, converting it into a rigid and rather narrow tube 



CARCINOMA OP THE STOMACH 417 

with thickened waUs formed of infiltrating growth. This type 
is known as linitis plastica or “ leather-bottle ” stomach. 

Symptoms. — The initial symptoms of carcinoma of the 
stomach are somewhat vague, starting with a feeling of 
discomfort in the epigastrium more definitely present after 
meals than at other times. Within a few weeks, the dis- 
comfort becomes more definitely pain ; the pain in carcinoma, 
however, in contrast to that of peptic ulcer, is usually more 
or less continuous, although aggravated by food. Once 
symptoms are thoroughly established, the patient never feels 
really comfortable even in the period between meals. The 
appetite fails early in the disease and there is often a marked 
distaste for meat of any kind. After a short time, nausea and 
vomiting occur, but vomiting seldom completely relieves the 
pain and discomfort. If the growth is in the neighbourhood 
of the pylorus, as it often is, pyloric obstruction soon leads to 
stagnation of food in the stomach. The vomit is often foul- 
smelling and may contain much changed blood, which resembles 
coffee-grounds in appearance, but severe haematemesis is very 
rare. Loss of weight is an early feature ; in fact, not infre- 
quently it is this which leads the patient to seek advice, rather 
than the dyspeptic symptoms. As the disease progresses, 
he presents the typical cachectic appearance of cancer : 
marked emaciation, sunken eyes, a loose dry skin, and a 
complexion which is markedly pale or sometimes tinged with 
yellow. 

Physical examination during the first few months of the 
disease will probably reveal nothing definite, but sooner or 
later a tumour becomes palpable which is hard and tender. 
In more advanced cases there may be evidence of secondary 
deposits as shown by the discovery of an enlarged hard and 
irregular liver, or a deposit of growth in the recto-vesical pouch 
felt on rectal examination. Rarely, the earliest sign to be 
detected is a hard enlarged gland just above the inner end of 
the left clavicle. The signs indicating pyloric stenosis are 
discussed elsewhere {vide p. 410). 

There is a wide variation in the clinical histories of patients 
with carcinoma of the stomach. Sometimes the abdominal 
symptoms may be so slight as to e8caj)e notice until secondary 
deposits make their appearance. The severity of the abdominal 
symptoms depends in part at least on the situation of the 
growth ; if this be well away from both the pyloric and cardiac 
orifices, no symptoms may arise until neighbouring organs are 
invaded or metwtases occur. Growths in the cai^ac portion 
of the stomach often give rise to few gastric symptoms, but 



418 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

may produce a rapidly progressive dysphagia. They are easily 
overlooked if the cardia is not visualised at X-ray examination. 
Probably a great deal of the cachexia is due to absorption of 
toxins from decomposing food in the stomach. 

In a small proportion of patients with gastric carcinoma 
the initial sjmiptoms may simulate those of a duodenal ulcer, 
though relief by food and alkali is not so striking. With 
“ leather-bottle stomach the patient may complain of a 
constant feeling of emptiness or hunger, but when he takes 
food this immediately produces feelings of distension or pain. 

Diagnosis. — The early diagnosis of carcinoma of the stomach 
is of supreme importance. If nothing is done until definite 
signs such as a tumour appear, the case will be then already 
too far advanced for radical surgical treatment. Every patient 
who develops dyspeptic symptoms after the. age of forty, haviiig 
previously enjoy^ good health, should always be viewed with 
suspicion as a possible case of gastric cancer. The clinical 
picture seen in the early stages of the disease is so variable that 
reliance must not be placed on this alone to exclude the diag- 
nosis, and the patient should at once be thoroughly investigated 
in order to come to a definite conclusion at the earliest possible 
moment. If, after a thorough investigation by all the means 
at our disposal, there remains a reasonable suspicion of growth, 
it is justifiable to advise an exploratory laparotomy. Only 
thus is it possible to diagnose the case sufficiently early for 
surgical treatment to be of real avail. 

The X-ray in early cases may show little beyond an 
absence of [peristaltic waves in the affected area of the stomach 
wall. In advanced cases large filling defects are usually 
obvious. With really good X-ray work probably 90 per cent, 
of carcinomata should be diagnosable in a stage at which 
operation is still possible. In a “ leather- bottle ” stomach 
the opaque meal runs immediately into the duodenum and 
no peristalsis is visible. 

A test meal is of great value in the early diagnosis of 
cancer. Dr Golding Bird showed at Guy’s Hospital in 1842 
that in gastric cancer free hydrochloric acid is deficient or 
often completely absent. With a fractional tost meal achlor- 
hydria is present in about 60 per cent, of cases and in the 
remainder the free acid is low. The character of the resting 
juice in the fractional test meal is important : it may be 
excessive in quantity, or contain food residue, starch, or sugar. 
Occasionally it has a definitely foul odour, and pus cells and 
red cells may be seen under the microscope. Blood, obvious 
to the naked eye, is often seen both in the resting juice and 



1‘l.ATK Hi 

( JiiciiK.ina of t iinliac I'lid tif Ntoniach. (I'roin plate 1)\ O. A, Mnr\(‘r.) 


\To face page IIS. 




419 


CARCINOMA OF THE STOMACH 

in the subsequent specimens. This, in conjunction with 
absence of free hydrochloric acid, is strongly suggestive of a 
growth. 

Great reliance is rightly placed on the presence of occult 
blood in the stools, provided it is found on several occasions 
and does not disappear with treatment. Care must always 
be taken to exclude bleeding from the gums as a possible 
explanation of continued occult blood in the stools. If there 
is complete absence of blood in repeated faecal specimens, it 
is almost certain that carcinoma of the stomach is not 
present. 

Blood counts, haemoglobin estimations, and examination 
of the blood cells do not give much help in the diagnosis of 
gastric cancer. Even in quite late stages of the disease these 
may aU appear perfectly normal, though as a rule there is some 
degree of hypochromic anaemia. The real value of examination 
of the blood is in the differential diagnosis of carcinoma of the 
stomach from pernicious anaemia. 

Differential Diagnosis. — The main points in the differential 
diagnosis from gastric and duodenal ulcers and chronic gastritis 
have been summarised in the table on page 409. Carcinoma of 
the colon is occasionally a difficulty, but as a rule the symptoms 
in that disease will point to involvement of the colon {vide p. 441). 
The diagnosis from pernicious anaemia is dealt with under that 
disease {vide p. 350). Carcinoma near the cardiac orifice is 
often misdiagnosed as an oesophageal growth. 

Prognosis. — If the disease has b^n aUowed to progress 
for any length of time, the outlook is hopeless and death may 
be expected to occur within a year. OccasionaUy cases of 
an atrophic type last for as long as three years, though this is 
very exceptional. Even if the case comes to operation suffici- 
ently early for a partial gastrectomy to be done, the outlook 
is poor. The immediate mortality of operation is over 20 per 
cent., and of those who survive only about 5 per cent, live for 
more than five years without recurrence. 

Treatment. — Once the diagnosis is made, unless the case is 
obviously inoperable a laparotomy should be performed. In 
inoperable cases the treatment can be only palliative, and in 
the later stages resolves itself into the alleviation of the pain 
by morphia. If this is freely used, as it should be, it is 
possible to enable the patient to die comfortably. As a rule 
small and frequent meals are best tolerated, but the patient 
may be allowed to eat what he likes best. If pyloric stenosis 
is present, palliative surgical treatment in the form of gastro- 
jejunostomy may give temporary relief. 



420 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

RARE DISORDERS OF THE STOMACH 

1. Syphilis of the Stomach. — Gummatous infiltration of the 
stomach is extremely rare. The symptoms resemble those of 
carcinoma, and the diagnosis is made mainly on the Wassermaim 
test or a history of infection. If antisyphilitio remedies prove 
successful in relieving the condition, the diagnosis is confirmed. 

2. Diaphragmatic Hernia. — The great majority of these are 
congenital in origin, though the condition may occasionally 
follow trauma, or violent spasms of coughing (e.g., whooping 
cough) in which hEemorrhage occurs into the diaphragm followed 
by fibrosis and stretching of muscle fibres. 

The organ most often herniated into the thorax is the 
stomach, but when there is a wide patency in the diaphragm 
the colon and other abdominal viscera may be also displaced. 
The s^miptoms are very variable and may be entirely absent, 
unless strangulation or obstruction occurs. The physical signs 
may resemble a left-sided pneumothorax but vary with 
the amount of food or gas in the stomach or colon. The 
diagnosis is often only made as a result of an X-ray examina- 
tion. 

Herniation ot a portion of the cardiac end of the stomach 
may result from a congenitally short oesophagus. This results 
in the cardiac orifice l)eing several inches above the diaphragm 
and a i>ortion of the stomach is drawn through the relatively 
narrow^ cardiac opening in the diaphragm. The condition is 
often symptomless, es[)ecially until after middle age. SjTuptoms 
may result from spasm or ulceration at the cardia or from 
partial obstruction at the level where the stomach passes 
through the diaphragm. The stomach may become divided 
into two pouches, and stomach contents collect in the upj>er 
one situated within the thorax. This may produce feelings of 
distension and discomfort suggestive of cholecystitis. There 
may be also a varialde degree of dysphagia with ptyalism or 
regurgitation of food and saliva. A definite diagnosis is only 
likely to be made if the patient is examined with a barium 
meal in the Trendelenburg fM)sition {vide IMate 17). 

Some forms of diaphragmatic hernia can be dealt with 
satisfactorily by surgery. Those due to a short oesophagus 
may in some cases obtain some relief of 8ymj)toms by dilatation 
through an cesophagoscope. 

3. Acute Dilatation of the Stomach. — In this rare condition 
there is a sudden dilatation of the stomach, which produces 
extreme abdominal distension, vomiting, and collapse. Such 



I’l.ATK IT 

< sliort «i*s(>}>hagiiH. { platt‘ l)y C>. A. Marxor.) 

[7"o fiice p<ige 420. 



FUNCTIONAL DISORDERS OF THE STOMACH 421 

dilatation occurs most often following abdominal operations, 
but it is not unknown as a rare complication of acute infections 
such as pneumonia. It is frequently fatal. 

Vigorous treatment is necessary. An Einhorn’s tube must 
be passed and the stomach kept empty by continuous suction. 
Nothing should be taken by mouth, but rectal or intravenous 
saline is beneficial. 

Atonic dilatation of the stomach is often described as 
occurring in patients suffering from malnutrition and neur- 
asthenia. There is little evidence that this is so and a true 
atonic dilatation is practically confined to cases of severe 
pyloric stenosis. 


FUNCTIONAL DISORDERS OF THE STOMACH 

Patients who suffer from demonstrable pathological con- 
ditions of the stomach, such as growths, ulcers, or gastritis, 
form but a small proportion of those who complain of 
symptoms referred to the digestive tract. Every practitioner 
daily encounters patients with symptoms such as abdominal 
pain or discomfort, distension, flatulence, nausea, vomiting, 
heartburn or acid regurgitations', in w^hom there does not 
api)ear to be any evidence of gross organic disease in the stomach 
or duodenum. In a proportion of such cases the gastric symp- 
toms may be shown to be secondary to local disease elsewhere 
in the abdomen, for example, in the gall-bladder, and these 
conditions are described as reflex dyspepsia. In others the 
failure of digestion appears to be the result of defective nervous 
control of the secretory and peristaltic functions, and the 
symptoms produced are termed nervous dyspepsia. 

Before proceeding to describe in detail the clinical features 
of these types of dyspepsia, it is necessarj" to discuss some of 
the main symptoms of which these patients complain. 

Flatulence. — Most patients use the term flatulence to 
describe the eructation of wind from either the mouth or the 
bowel, and it is important, when questioning a patient who 
complains of flatulence, to ascertain the exact nature of the 
symptom, as gastric flatulence and colonic flatulence are likely 
to have quite different causes. Most patients with gastric 
flatulence also complain of sensations of fullness and distension 
in the upper abdomen or lower part of the chest. The distension 
produces abdominal discomfort rather than real pain. 

In the v^t majority of oases of gastric flatulence the 
eructated gas is odourless. When this is not the case the patient 



422 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

is probably suffering from pyloric obstruction or gastro- colic 
fistula. 

Contrary to the belief of most patients who suffer from 
flatulence, the eructated gas is not a product of abnormal 
fermentation in the stomach, but is merely air which has been 
swallowed. The presence of a certain amount of air in the 
stomach is invariable, but it may be very much increased by 
the constant swallowing of air (aerophagy). Relief is obtained 
when the patient eructates, but, unfortunately, repeated 
attempts to do so result in the swallowing of still more air, 
some portion of which passes into the small intestine, where it 
produces loud rumblings and borborygmi, which still further 
distress and embarrass the patient 

Although flatulence of the gastric type is often no evidence 
of organic disease, it is important to realise that it is frequently 
a symptom associated with pathological conditions in the gastro- 
intestinal tract. Chronic cholecystitis, either with or without 
gall-stones, almost invariably causes flatulence and distension, 
which are due in part to aerophagy, but also to disordered 
gastric motility secondary to inflammation of the gaU -bladder. 
Flatulence is also sometimes a feature of carcinoma of the 
stomach and of duodenal ulcer ; in the latter case it is usually 
accompanied by epigastric pain of duodenal type. Flatulence 
also results from hastily bolted meals and defective mastication. 

Flatulence is a symptom which varies verj’^ much in severity. 
Patients who eructate like the eruptions of a miniature volcano 
are less likely to have any underlying organic disease than are 
those who suffer from more or less silent flatulence. If a 
patient with severe flatulence is carefully watched, frequent 
gulping of air can be readily detected. In such cases the 
mechanism of the condition must be explained to the patient, 
and particular emphasis be laid on the fact that the regurgitated 
gas is not the product of fermentation or acidity. Strict 
injunctions should be given that on no account should the 
patient attempt to “ bring up wind.” Once the habit of 
aerophagy has been established it becomes a reflex, and the 
patient has an overwhelming desire to swallow. As this mainly 
occurs after meals, it is a good plan to instruct the patient to 
hold a cork between his teeth for half an hour after each 
meal or whenever he feels distended. This acts as a gag and 
keeps the mouth open, thereby inhibiting attempts to swallow. 
Such a procedure, provided it has been preceded by explanation 
and reassurance, may effect a dramatic cure. 

Aerophagy and eructation can be performed voluntarily. 
In the East guests at feasts eructate loudly at frequent interval 



functional disorders of the stomach 423 

as a mark of their appreciation of the fare provided, and the 
guest who does not conform by swallowing adequate amounts 
of air is thought to be lacking in courtesy. 

Acidity. — Many dyspeptics complain of what they term 
acidity. Usually this is purely an assumption on their part, 
suggested by the advertisements of patent medicines which 
purport to remedy the condition. There is, indeed, no evidence 
that hyTperchlorhydria necessarily produces any symptoms, and 
it is quite common to find that a test meal done on one who 
considers himself a martyr to acidity may show hypochlor- 
hydria or even a complete absence of acid. The only symptom 
which gives definite evidence of abnormal acidity is acid regurgi- 
tation. This is characterised by sudden regurgitation into the 
throat and mouth of sour, burning fluid. It is not met with very 
commonly, but may occur in patients with duodenal ulcer. 

Heartburn. — The sensation so described is one of burning 
along the course of the oesophagus. The area in which it may 
occur ranges along a vertical line extending from the xiphi- 
stemum upwards into the neck. The sensation may last for a 
few minutes only, or sometimes for longer periods. It does not 
necessarily indicate hyperchlorhydria, and is probably due to 
tonic contractions in the circxilar muscle of the oesophagus. 
Heartburn is a frequent symptom in patients who are over- 
worked, over-anxious or fatigued. Dietetic readjustments, a 
holiday, and a little sodium bicarbonate are valuable curative 
measures. 

Water brash. — By this is meant the presence in the mouth 
of clear watery fluid without any of the burning or acid 
character of acid regurgitation. It is probably a sudden and 
excessive salivary secretion akin to ptyalism. Though it may 
be associated with duodenal ulcer or gastritis, it often occurs 
in the absence of any demonstrable organic lesion. 

Abdominal Pain. — It has already been mentioned that pain 
is not a frequent feature of dyspepsia, unless there is a definite 
lesion such as an ulcer. Sometimes, however, patients complain 
of hunger pain in the epigastrium. Often this is more a 
sensation of sinking than actual pain. WTiether himger pain 
is associated with a duodenal ulcer or not, it is aggravated 
by worry, fatigue, and cold, and often relieved by relaxation 
and a holiday. Hunger pain, though most commonly encoun- 
tered with a duodenal ulcer, also occurs in biliary dyspepsia. 
Sometimes it is dependent on over-smoking. It is probably 
produced by excessive peristaltic activity in the pyloric end of 
the stomach with some degree of pylorospasm. Needless to 
say, hunger-pain should never be regarded as a functional 



424 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

disorder until the most searching investigations have as far as 
possible ruled out the -presence of a duodenal ulcer or other 
pathological condition. 

Nausea and Vomiting, — These symptoms are frequent in 
patients with organic disease, but also occur with reflex 
dyspepsia, particularly when this is due to cholecystitis. 
They may, however, also occur as the result of emotional 
upsets. Repeated vomiting, particularly immediately after 
food, is often hysterical in origin. In such cases only a portion 
of the meal is vomited, and undemutrition is not striking in 
relationship to the frequency of the vomiting. Psychotherapy 
and firm handling usually produce a rapid disappearance of 
symptoms. 


Reflex Dyspepsias 

The most frequent cause of reflex dyspepsia is chronic 
cholecystitis, the symptoms of which are described elsewhere 
(vide p. 475). Dyspeptic symptoms are also frequently ascribed, 
perhaps too frequently, to chronic appendicitis (vide p. 438). 

A rather uncommon form of reflex dysi)ei)sia is that which 
may result from an epigastric hernia. If the linea alba between 
the umbilicus and the xiphistemum is examined, a small tender 
lump can be felt, which is a protrusion of extra-peritoneal fat 
through a small opening in the linea alba. Epigastric hernias 
do not necessarily cause symptoms, and it is important before 
making a diagnosis of dyspepsia due to this cause to exclude 
other conditions. 

Apart from reflex dyspepsia, digestive disturbances are often 
due to faulty habits. Chief among these are irregular and 
hastily swallowed meals, physical exercise too soon after food, 
overeating, or too long intervals without a meal. The sjTnptoms 
complained of are mostly discomfort and fullness in the epi- 
gastrium after a meal and loss of appetite. There is probably 
a resultant gastritis, and a simple readjustment of the daily 
routine produces rapid improvement. Such forms of indigestion 
have been termed by Ryle habit dyspepsia. 


NERVOUS DYSPEPSIA 

At the present time there is a tendency to discourage the 
emplojTnent ol the term nervous dyspepsia as a diagnosis. 
While it is true that such a diagnosis should bo made with 
caution and only after a full consideration of the fact^ in each 



NERVOUS DYSPEPSIA 


425 


individual case, there are a large number of patients in whom 
dyspeptic symptoms can only be explained on the basis of 
abnormal emotional states^ Gastric and intestinal motility 
depend on the proper functioning of a delicate nervous mechan- 
ism, and the same is true of the secretion of the digestive juices. 
Any factors w'hich upset the nervous mechanism may produce 
symptoms referred to the gastro-intestinal tract. So common 
a phrase as sick with fear illustrates the familiar fact that 
fear or anxiety may produce a sensation of nausea or even 
actual vomiting. Similarly, emotions such as grief or acute 
anxiety commonly produce anorexia or nausea. Emotion may 
also disorganise the normal functioning of the intestine or 
bladder. While it is true that in most normal persons gastro- 
intestinal upsets due to emotions such as fear, grief, excitement, 
or anxiety are of comparatively brief duration, there is certainly 
a well-defined group of patients in whom these factors produce 
a more lasting effect. 

Nervous dyspepsia is one of the most common manifestations 
of an anxiety state. Often in addition to gastro-intestinal 
symptoms there may be other complaints, such as palpitation, 
headaches, lassitude, lack of power of concentration, and 
insomnia. The symptoms are very variable both in duration' 
and severity. Perhaps the most frequent complaint is flatulence 
and distension occurring soon after meals. Pain is unusual, 
though the patient often complains of abdominal discomfort 
and a sensation of weight in the epigastrium. Loss of appetite 
and sometimes nausea are frequent, but, unhke these symptoms 
in chronic gastritis, they are not specially prominent in the 
early morning. The anxiety element is usually very obvious, 
and the patient may have already made up his mind that he 
has cancer. Often, howev^er, he is not prepared to admit his 
fears to the doctor lest he should be thought to be neurotic. 
In such cases a thorough physical examination, followed by a 
barium meal, may often effect a remarkable cure. 

Probably in all anxiety states the receptivity of the nervous 
system is increased and patients in this condition become 
aware of peristaltic movements in stomach and intestine, 
which in normal persons do not produce any sensations. In 
addition, owing to the disordered nervous system, there is 
increased and abnormally vigorous peristalsis, often with 
considerable aerophagy. Sometimes the condition is aggravated 
by a great increase m the number of cigarettes smoked, or 
perhaps by the taking of excessive amounts of alcohol. 

A knowledge of the patient’s circumstances and environ- 
jnent is of great value. Financial and business worries leading 



426 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

to overwork and exhaustion are potent factors in the production 
of digestive upsets. The same is true, and even more so, in 
the case of domestic unhappiness. Marital infelicity, broken-off 
engagements, unfaithfulness of husband or wife, aged and 
crotchety parents, illness or deaths of children or loved ones are 
among the more frequent causes of anxiety states, in which 
nervous dyspepsia may be the most prominent feature. 
Perpetual quarrels at meals, so common among ill-assorted 
couples, are particularly detrimental to the digestion. Alvarez, 
in his stimulating book on “ Nervous Indigestion,” quotes 
the very true words from the seventeenth chapter of Proverbs : 
“ Better is a dry morsel and quietness therewith than a house 
full of feasting with strife.” 

It must not be forgotten that patients with nervous dyspepsia 
are liable, especially if the condition is of long duration, to 
develop an organic lesion, particularly a duodenal ulcer. This 
is specially likely if the patient is of the type who has a rather 
small hyperactive stomach and a raised gastric acidity. When- 
ever a patient with dyspeptic symptoms thought to be of 
nervous origin fails to react to treatment a full investigation 
should be insisted upon, including an X-ray examination, a 
test meal and examination of faecal specimens for occult blood. 
If these are all negative they provide additional reassurance not 
only to the patient but to his medical adviser. 

Some patients \^ith nervous dyspepsia are very prone 
to imagine that certain articles of diet ‘‘ disagree with 
them.” In consequence they may progressively limit their 
diet until they suffer from chronic inanition. If they can 
be persuaded to take a liberal and nutritious diet their 
health improves. 

The first essential in the treatment of a patient with nervous 
dyspepsia is to acquire his confidence. On no account should 
it be suggested that the symptoms are imaginary or exaggerated. 
In dealing with educated and intelligent patients it is well ter 
stress the fact that the normal movements of the stomach and 
intestine, and abo the secretion of the digestive juices, are all 
dependent on an adequate nervous control. When the central 
nervous system is in a state of increased excitability as a result 
of anxiety, emotion, or overwork and stress, this must react on 
the nervous mechanism controlling digestion. If aerophagy is 
troublesome, as is so often the case, the mechanism by which it 
occurs can be explained, and the patient is instructed how to 
avoid swallowing air by restraining his attempts at eructation 
and keeping his mouth open after meals with a cork. If the 
dyspepsia is being aggravated by incorrect habits of feeding or 



NERVOUS DYSPEPSIA 


427 


by dental sepsis, steps should be taken to readjust the patient’s 
routine, and he shoidd be made to consult his dental surgeon. 
Sometimes the patient may already be taking purgatives under 
the impression, derived from advertisements, that they will 
“clear his system” or “stimulate his liver.” If this is so he 
should be advised to avoid purgative drugs and take small 
doses of paraffin or petrolagar, if necessary. 

Dyspepsia associated with constipation occurs frequently 
among young women who work in offices. It is often due to 
getting up late, a hastily swallowed breakfast, and a rush to 
the station. There is no time for defaecation, and as a result a 
chronic constipation develops, which is relieved periodically by 
a powerful purgative. 

In most cases of nervous dyspepsia, reassurance and explana- 
tion, combined with rest and a holiday, are of greater: value 
than dieting and drugs. Very often the patient may already 
have limited the diet to a totally unnecessary degree, and if 
this is discontinued and a plain, ordinary diet instituted, there 
will be an improvement in the general health. Sometimes 
patients benefit by taking rather small dry meals and by 
avoiding large amounts of liquids at meals. Excessive con- 
sumption of tea or coffee should be forbidden. As regards 
drugs, a bromide mixture with a little arsenic is often of value 
in dulling the keen edge of the patient’s anxieties. Although 
nervous d3F6f>ep8ia is by no means always associated with a 
high gastric acidity, alkaline mixtures are often effective in 
alleviating the symptoms. Magnesia emulsion with the addition 
of 5 minims of tincture of belladonna is worth a trial. The 
belladonna probably renders peristalsis less vigorous and 
prevents pylorospasm. 

Nervous dyspepsia is an extremely common condition, 
probably considerably more common than duodenal ulcer or 
cholecystitis. 

In patients suffering from anxiety neuroses a vicious circle 
is often established. Dyspeptic symptoms arise as a result of 
their anxieties, and the digestive disturbance produces still 
further anxiety. Unfortunately the difficulties, environmental, 
domestic, or ^ancial, which induce the original anxiety state, 
are usually beyond the control of the medical attendant, but 
it is often possible to alleviate the condition by eradicating 
from the patient’s mind the idea that he is suffering from some 
serious organic ailment. 

Anorexia Nervosa* — It is a well-recognised fact that after 
even a short period of fasting there is a loss of appetite, 
which may sometimes beconie so complete that the patient 



428 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

loathes even the sight or thought of food. This condition 
is described as anorexia nervosa and occurs chiefly in 
young women. Although the patients may be extremely 
emaciated and cachectic, they nevertheless often lead most 
active and even restless Hves and maintain that they are 
perfectly fit. 

The origin of the anorexia is nearly always psychogenic and 
not infrequently it follows domestic upsets, such as a broken-off 
engagement, or it may represent a means of escape from a 
difficult situation. Occasionally the anorexia follows on a 
deliberate reduction of diet owing to fears of obesity. Some- 
times, especially in children, refusal to eat starts as an attempt 
to become a centre of interest. As an example of this condition 
may be quoted a case who was in Guy’s Hospital under the 
care of Sir Arthur Hurst some years ago. The patient was a 
girl of about seventeen, who for many months had been 
limiting her diet until she was eating practically nothing. 
On careful questioning it was found that other girls at 
her school called her a ‘‘ fat German,” as her name was 
somewhat foreign. Her anorexia had developed in an 
attempt to diminish her weight, as her name she could 
not alter. When the position was explained to her she 
readily consented to eat an ordinary diet and returned to 
her normal weight and health. 

In addition to the anorexia these patients often have 
amenorrhoea which, in conjunction with the emaciation, some- 
times has led to a diagnosis of Simmonds’ disease {vide p. 292). 
Injections of hormones, however, are quite useless, and the 
symptoms disappear if the patient can regain her normal 
nutrition by returning to a normal diet. 

Anorexia nervosa is a serious condition as it renders the 
patient an easy victim to intercurrent infection. Patients 
cannot be satisfactorily treated in their own homes, as unless 
there is strict supervision it is impossible to ensure that 
adequate meals are eaten. They should be kept in bed in a 
nursing home or institution and, at any rate to begin with, 
the doctor must supervise the eating of their meals. A 
simple explanation to the patient that the illness is due 
to lack of food is of more immediate value than elaborate 
psychotherapy. A full mixed diet should be given from the 
outset, and in addition the patient should be made to take 
large amounts of glucose. If handled with firmness, 
patience and tact the patient’s resistance to taking food 
is usually overcome quite quickly, weight increases and 
health is r^ained. 



DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 42d 


DISEASES OF THE INTESTINES 
Physiology of the Intestinal Movements 

The small intestine consists of the duodenum, jejunum, 
and ileum, and is about 22 ft. in length, while the large intestine 
or colon is about 6 ft. long. There is a marked contrast between 
the types of peristalsis seen in the small intestine and in the 
colon. In the former the food passes rapidly through the coils 
of intestine and reaches the ileo-csecal valve in about three and 
a half hours, while the passage of food residue through the 
colon may take twenty-four hours or more before the rectum 
is reached. 

The food as it leaves the stomach passes very rapidly 
through the duodenum and jejunum and gradually slows up 
in its course through the lower portion of the ileum. In 
addition to |)eristaltic waves which sweep the food along the 
intestine, segmentation movements take place, consisting of 
localised contractions in the intestine, which help to mix food 
and digestive juices and bring them in contact with the mucous 
membrane of the intestinal wall, thereby facilitating processes 
of absorption. 

Our knowledge of the intestinal movements has been 
obtained almost entirely from the radiological studies of 
Cannon, Hurst, and others. If the course of a barium meal 
be traced through the intestines it is found to reach the deo- 
caecal valve in about three and a half hours. At this point the 
barium is held up for a considerable time until the ileo-caecal 
sphincter relaxes and peristaltic movements in the terminal 
coils of the ileum drive the meal through into the caecum. 
The passage of the barium into the colon is markedly acceler- 
ated during and shortly after the taking of food into the stomach. 
Thus it would appear that peristalsis in the lower coils of the 
ileum occurs reflexly as the result of gastric distension, the 
so-called gastro^ileal reflex. Although at an X-ray examination 
movements of the small intestine are invariably observed, it 
is extremely rare to see any peristalsis in the large intestine, 
in spite of the fact that the contents of the colon obviously 
must move towards the rectum. The explanation of this 
lies in the fact that colonic peristalsis occurs only at infrequent 
intervals, probably not more than three or four times a day, 
and it is therefore unlikely to be observed during the relatively 
short period in which an individual is being examined under 



430 DISEASES OP THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

the fluorescent screen. The colonic movements consist of 
what has been termed “ mass peristalsis : the contents of 
a whole section of the colon move bodily onwards without 
segmentation through a considerable length of the colon within 
a period of a few seconds, so that within less than a minute 
the distribution of a barium meal in the colon may be com- 
pletely altered. This process of mass peristalsis carries the 
food residue or faeces around the colon until it reaches the 
pelvi-rectal flexure, which is a more or less acute angle at 
the junction of the rectum and pelvic colon. Just as the 
taking of food produces a reflex stimulation of the movements 
of the ileum, so it tends to produce mass peristalsis in the 
colon, the gastro-colic reflex. 

The act of defaecation is normally initiated by the passage 
of accumulated faecal material from the loop of pelvic colon 
through the pelvi-rectal flexure into the rectum. This is 
commonly brought about as a reflex result of taking a meal, 
particularly if the latter be hot or bulky. The distension of 
the rectum immediately produces a sensation that defaecation 
is necessary, and the act of defaecation itself occurs partly as the 
result of reflex contractions in the colon and partly from 
voluntary relaxation of the anal sphincter, with an increase in 
the abdominal pressure from voluntary contraction of the 
abdominal muscles and diaphragm. During defaecation peri- 
stalsis occurs throughout the colon, and all its contents, at any 
rate from the splenic flexure downwards, are driven into the 
rectum and expelled through the relaxed anal sphincter. The 
mucous membrane of the rectum itself is insensitive to tactile 
stimulation, and the call to defaecation is the result of 
stretching of the muscle fibres of the rectal wall, induced by 
the entry of faeces into the rectum from the pelvic colon. A 
similar sensation may be produced by increasing the intra- 
rectal pressure by blowing up a rubber bag placed in its lumen. 
In normal individuals the rectum is empty both after defaeca- 
tion and until just before the act of defaecation. 


CONSTIPATION 

What has been said above in reference to the mechanism 
of defaecation gives us the explanation of that form of constipa- 
tion, termed by Hurst dyachezia, which is that most commonly 
met with in practice. By dyschezia is meant an inability 
to defaecate completely ; even in the most severe oases of this 
type of constipation there is no delay in the passage of the 



CONSTIPATION 431 

faeces through the colon until the pelvic colon is reached. The 
great majority of cases arise from faulty habits regarding 
defaecation. As haa been pointed out, the normal stimulus to 
defaecation is distension of the rectum, and it must be the 
personal experience of all that if the “ cadi to defaecation ’’ be 
neglected for any reason, the sense of discomfort in the neigh- 
bourhood of the rectum passes off in the course of quite a short 
time, and the individual no longer feels any need to empty 
his bowels. In all probability the feeling again arises after 
the next meal owing to the rectum becoming further distended, 
as the result of additional faeces entering it from the pelvic 
colon. Most cases of dyschezia arise from habitual neglect 
to respond to the normal stimulus ; this neglect is the result 
most commonly of laziness or preoccupation with other 
activities, and is specially liable to occur in childhood. If this 
habitual neglect is continued over a prolonged period, the 
warning that defaecation is indicated becomes progressively 
diminished, until in well-established cases of dyschezia it is 
possible for the rectum to be continuously distended with 
faeces, without the production of any sensation of discomfort. 
Only too often after the constipation has lasted for some days 
the patient takes a powerful purgative, thereby hurrying the 
passage of the faeces through the parts of the colon in which 
there is no delay into the pelvic colon and rectum, where it 
produces so considerable a rise in tension that defaecation is 
initiated. The bowels having been thoroughly emptied by 
a purge, the whole baneful process is repeated, and soon the 
patient gives up all effort to effect an evacuation unless a purge 
has been taken. Eventually constant stretching of the muscular 
wall of the rectum and pelvic colon by retained faeces produces 
a condition of atony and weakness in the muscle fibres them- 
selves, which render recovery from the condition difficult. 

Dyschezia as described above is specially liable to occur 
in young women who go out to work in factories or offices 
every day. Going late to bed, with resulting disinclination 
to get up in the morning, too often means a hurried and 
inadequate breakfast and no time to visit the water-closet 
before catching train or bus. If a call to defaecation occurs 
later it is again often neglected as the result of false modesty 
or a disinclination to leave work. Another potent cause of 
dyschezia is an inadequate supply of sanitary accommodation 
in schools or institutions. 

For the efficient performance of the act of defaecation there 
is needed not only the stimulus conveyed by a distended 
rectum but a forcible contraction of the muscles which raise 



432 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

the intra-abdominal pressure during evacuation. Consequently, 
even though there is no delay in the passage of faeces through 
the colon, dyschezia may result firom weakness of the abdominal 
muscles, the diaphragm, or the muscles of the pelvic floor, 
all of which come into play during normal defaecation. A 
sedentary life without any exercise will lead to flabby abdominal 
muscles ; similarly, overstretching of the abdominal wall as 
a result of pregnancies or damage to the pelvic floor during 
labour frequently leads to dyschezia. 

Another less frequent cause of dyschezia is found in local 
conditions which interfere with the emptying of the rectum. 
Fissures or inflamed piles by their pain tend to produce spasm 
of the sphincter and inability to defeecate. Inflammatory con- 
ditions of the female generative organs may produce difficulty 
in defaecation, while the lumen of the rectal or anal canal may 
obviously be narrowed by such pathological conditions as 
growths or strictures. 

Although the great majority of the cases of constipation 
commonly met vith in practice fall into the class of dj^'schezia, 
constipation may also occur in which the passage of the faeces 
is undul}" slow throughout the length of the colon. This is 
known as colic constipation or colonic stasis and is due to a 
variety of causes. It may occur as the result of weakness in 
the muscles of the colonic wall, which are incapable of exerting 
sufficient force to produce mass peristalsis. This condition 
is liable to occur in the subjects of chronic diseases and in old 
age. In other cases there may be spasm of localised areas in 
the colon leading to what has been termed spastic colitis. This 
is probably the explanation of the constipation associated 
with lead-poisoning and sometimes with the excessive use of 
tobacco. Colic constipation may also occur as the result of 
pathological conditions in or around the colon, such as growths, 
strictures due to cicatrisation of ulcers, diverticulitis, or chronic 
intussusception. In cases of functional nervous disorders, such 
as neurasthenia and depressive states, constipation is often 
very troublesome, owing to diminished reflex activity. 

There remains a third type of constipation due to a diet 
which is inadequate in amount or contains too little unabsorb- 
able residue. The amount of food actually consumed may be 
unduly restricted as the result of poverty, deficient appetite, 
or functional nervous conditions, or it may contain too small 
an amount of firuit and green vegetables. The passage of the 
fasces in such cases is not as a rule delayed until the pelvic 
colon is reached, but owing to inadequate bulk the normal 
stimulus to defaecation is not produced. 



CONSTIPATION 433 

There is a wide variation in normal individuals as regards 
defoeoation. Although a movement of the bowels once every 
twenty-foxir hours is usually regarded as normal, there are 
many people in perfect health who defsecate only once in forty- 
eight hours ; on the other hand, two or even three motions a 
day may be simply the result of habit rather than of deranged 
function. A diagnosis of dyschezia can usually be made on 
the strength of the history and the constant presence of fasces 
in the rectum on digital examination. In cases of colonic stasis, 
an accurate diagnosis usually necessitates the use of X-rays. 

Symptoms. — In uncomplicated cases of dyschezia it is very 
doubtful whether there is any real absorption of toxins from 
the retention of faeces in the rectum and pelvic colon. Probably 
the symptoms complained of are largely the result of auto- 
suggestion based on advertisements of purgatives. Discomfort 
is more likely to follow the taking of powerful purgatives, 
both from the colic they produce and possibly as the result 
of toxic absorption from liquid faeces in the colon. 

While there can be no doubt that constipation frequently 
aggravates other diseases such as migraine, epilepsy, asthma, 
or nephritis, and may in itself produce lassitude, headache, 
vertigo, anorexia, and many other symptoms, there is no 
evidence that it is really responsible for the sjmdrome formerly 
described as chronic intestinal stasis.” 

Treatment of Constipation. — Before attempting to treat a 
patient with constipation it is essential to arrive at a definite 
diagnosis of the type of constipation present. Very often a 
readjustment of the diet wdth alteration of the daily habits 
as regards exercise may suffice. In long-standing cases of 
dyschezia the use of enemata for a considerable period may be 
necessary, but it is important that the patient should make 
a real effort to defaecate without artificial aid. The faulty 
conditions of life which have led to the condition must be 
explained to the patient, who often, by the time medical advice 
is sought, is fully persuaded that it is quite impossible for a 
movement of the bowels to occur without drugs. The volume 
of the enemata should gradually be reduced, and in most 
cases after a few weeks of treatment it is found that they can 
be dispensed with completely. Alternatively small glycerin 
enemata may be used (2 to 4 drachms of glycerin diluted wdth 
an equal volume of water). As it is easier to evacuate semi- 
solid faeces than the harf soybala common in constipation, 
liquid paraffin should be taken. In most mild cases this is 
effective alone if taken properly ; not infrequently patients 
say that they cannot take paraffin, as it “ runs through them ” ; 

28 



434 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

on careful inquiry it will usually be discovered that they are 
taking a single large dose once in the day. As the action of 
paraffin is purely mechanical, it is important to take it at least 
twice and preferably thrice daily shortly after the main meals, 
as it then is able to get thoroughly mixed with the food through- 
out the intestinal canal. In order to increase the bulk of the 
faeces a mucilage such os agar-agar can be given in conjunction 
with paraffin. In some very severe cases of dyschezia the 
muscle of the rectal wall seems to have completely lost its 
tone, and evacuation by means of enemata may have to be 
persisted in almost indefinitely. 

In the case of dyschezia due to weakened abdominal 
muscles, efforts must be made to increase their tone by 
exercises. The assumption of a squatting position during 
the act of defaecation may also be employed in such cases, 
as the pressure of the thighs on the abdomen may help to 
raise the intra-abdominal pressure. 

When constipation is proved to be the result of deficient 
power or tone in the colon itself, abdominal massage may be 
useful. If it is due to organic pathological conditions in the 
colon itself, these must be dealt with. 

Although purgative drugs are usually unnecessary for any 
length of time in constipation, it is often desirable at the begin- 
ning of treatment to clear out the intestine. The combination 
of an enema and a dose of castor oil will usually be efficacious. 
If purgatives have to be employed over a prolonged period, 
and paraffin is not satisfactory^ an infusion of senna pods may 
be tried ; five to eight pods are soaked for twenty -four hours 
in cold water, which is then drunk ; the dose can readily be 
regulated by vary ing the number of pods. 


CHRONIC DIARRHOEA 

When a patient complains of diarrhcea lasting for more tlian 
a few^ days the medical attendant must insist upon seeing the 
stools. Naked eye examination may reveal obvious blood, 
mucus or pus, which necessitates an immediate investigation 
with the sigmoidoscope and X-ray, if the danger of overlooking 
such serious conditions as a growth of the colon or rectum is 
to be avoided. 

Chronic diarrhcea may be due to various causes : — 

1. Defective digestive secretions : (a) gastrogenous diar- 
rhcaa ; (6) fatty diarrhoea in pancreatic insufficiency 
{vide p. 482). 



CHRONIC DIABBHCEA 435 

2. Organio diseafie in the intestine : tuberculous ulceration, 

ulcerative colitis, dysentery, growths. 

3. Toxic or infective conditions : ursemia, septicaemia, 

especially streptococcal, Graves' disease. 

4. Nervous diarrhoea. 

The diarrhoea associated with the conditions listed under 
(2) and (3) above is merely a symptom and needs no dis- 
cussion here. Gastrogenous and nervous diarrhoea are not 
uncommon. 

Gastrogenous Diarrhoea. — Patients with achlorhydria or 
hypochlorhydria may suffer from a troublesome chronic 
diarrhoea. The stools are loose, but contain no blood or mucus. 
The symptoms are as a rule most marked in the mornings. 
The diarrhoea may be due to impaired gastric digestion and 
rapid emptying of the stomach. Treatment with hydrochloric 
acid is usually strikingly effective. One drachm of acid, 
hydrochlor. dil. (B.P.) should be taken in a glass of lemon or 
orangeade with each meal. 

Nervous Diarrhoea. — The satisfactory functioning of the 
intestinal tract depends on the nervous system. Worry, 
anxiety, and fear produce over-activity of the gastro-coUc 
reflex and increased intestinal peristalsis, which, though usually 
a purely transient phenomenon, may sometimes last for long 
periods, especially in anxiety neuro^. Often this type of 
diarrhoea is lienteriCy defaecation occurring immediately after 
every meal. The symptoms are little affected by diet. In 
such patients the following mixture is often helpful : tinct. 
belladonnae n\v, tinct. hyoscyami IT^xx, aqua menth. pip. 
ad 5SS. t.d.s. p.c. Hot drinks are best avoided, but the generfid 
nervous condition of the patient needs attention. Reassuranoe 
and a bromide mixture are required. Codeine gr. pill) is 
often effective and is convenient to carry. 

Pseudo-diarrhcsa. — Diarrhcea may occur in cases of what 
is really constipation. Thus with growths of the colon there 
may be an accumulation of fseoes above the stricture, although 
a certain amount of fluid fasces, often mixed with blood and 
mucus, are passed at frequent intervals. Similarly intus- 
susception may be characterised by the frequent passage of 
blood, although obstruction of the bowel is present. Sometimes, 
even in cases of dyschezia, there may be frequent motions 
consisting of a few small scybala, and the patient may describe 
the condition as one of diarrhoea. The error is eatsily discovered 
by finding masses of faeces in the rectum. 

Undoubtedly some individuals are more liable to attacks 



436 DISEASES OF THE AIJaOTNTARY CANAL 

of diarrhoea than others, owing to some inherent hyper- 
irritability of the colon. This is often the case after amoebio 
dysentery. Even many years after the last acute attack the 
slightest dietetic indiscretion may lead to an attack of diairhoea. 
Persons with a tendency to diarrhoea should avoid residence 
in a tropical climate. 

Intestinal Carbohydrate Dyspepsia. — In this condition there 
is a deficiency of diastase in ^e intestinal juices, which results 
in an imperfect digestion of starch. Fermentation occurs in 
the colon with the production of much carbon dioxide. 

Symptoms , — ^The patient’s main complaints are a feeling 
of abdominal distension and discomfort, borborygmi, and the 
passage of much flatus. The symptoms are often much 
aggravated at night, waking the patient and causing insomnia. 
Pain is unusual, but sometimes there is diarrhoea and colic 
due to a secondary colospasm. Much relief is experienced 
after the passage of flatus. 

Treatment , — There is no diflSculty in the digestion of sugar, 
and therefore no need for this to be restricted. Free starch, 
as in flour and bread, is also usually well digested. The starch 
in root vegetables, rice, and potatoes is, however, enclosed 
in cellulose envelopes, and it is chiefly in this form that it 
reaches the c«cum, when the digestion of starch in the small 
intestine is defective. In cases of intestinal carbohydrate 
dyspepsia it is therefore important to exclude completely from 
the diet potatoes, rice, and root vegetables. This alone is 
often sufficient to relieve the symptoms. In addition to 
dietetic restrictions, diastase tableU (5 gr. t.d.s.) may be taken 
and also 1 to 2 drachms of finely powdered charcoal thrice 
daily. As a result of treatment the excess of starch in the 
stools rapidly disappears, and the dietetic restrictions can be 
gradually relaxed. Potatoes, however, should be avoided 
permanently. 


INTUSvSUSCEPTION 

In this condition a portion of the intestine, usually the ileum 
near the Ueo-caecal valve, is invaginated into the lumen of 
the bowel immediately below. Infante are far more often 
affected than adults, and in the former the symptoms are 
acute, whereas in the latter they are usually chronic. 

Acute Intussusception in Infants. — Male children are 
mainly affected and the disease is most common during 
the first year of life. The victims of acute intussusception 
are usually healthy, weU-nouriahed infants, but slight gastro- 



mrussuscEpnoN 437 

intestinal upsets often immediately^ precede the onset of 
intussusception. 

Symptoms , — ^The illness begins with colicky abdominal pain, 
which causes the child to scream ; soon after iiie onset, vomiting 
occurs, but is seldom repeated. After the passage of one or 
two normal motions, nothing but blood and mucus is passed. 
On palpation a sausage-shaped tumour is often felt lying trans- 
versely across the abdomen with its concavity downwards. 
This consists of the intussusoepted gut and may ultimately 
extend round into the left iliac fossa. There is no rigidity 
except during attacks of pain, but the abdomen may become 
distended. The pulse is rapid but the temperature remains 
subnormal. Unless the condition is reliev^ by operation, 
death is almost certain. 

Diagnosis , — In infants the passage of pure blood or blood 
and mucus quite unmixed with faecal material and with no 
faecal odour, is practically diagnostic of intussusception. The 
typical tumour can often be felt, though occasionally an 
anaesthetic is necessary to enable it to be recognised. The 
only conditions with which acute intussusception is Hkely to 
be confused are acute colitis or Henoch’s purpura, which may 
indeed sometimes be complicated by intussusception ; in these 
conditions, however, there is practically always a faecal odour 
in the stools even if there be no obvious faecal material. 
Moreover, in acute colitis the onset is likely to be more gradual 
than in intussusception. 

Treatment , — Immediate operation is necessary. 

Chronic Intussusception. — Intussusception also occurs in 
adults, more commonly in males than in females ; the condition 
is usually brought about by the presence of a growth, either 
innocent or malignant, which forms the apex of the invaginated 
gut. The symptoms point to an intermittent chronic obstruc- 
tion, often with blood and mucus in the faeces. Sometimes a 
palpable mass can be felt in the abdomen ; this may vary in 
size from time to time and may disappear completely owing 
to the bowel becoming disinvaginated, only to recur at a 
later date. Owing to the obstruction, colicky pains occur, 
and during the exacerbations there may be constipation and 
vomiting. Sometimes acute obstruction may supervene after 
a period of intermittent chronic obstruction. Often the 
condition is mistaken for a growth, and the true diagnosis 
is not made until laparotomy is performed. Treatment 
consists in early operation, at which the intussusception 
is reduced and a careful search made for a cause, such as 
a polypus or growth. 



436 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

of diarrhcBa than others, owing to some inherent hyper- 
irritability of the colon. This is often the case after amoebic 
dysentery. Even many years after the last acute attack the 
slightest dietetic indiscretion may lead to an attack of diarrhoea. 
Persons with a tendency to diarrhoea should avoid residence 
in a tropical climate. 

Intestinal Carbohydrate Dyspepsia. — In this condition there 
is a deficiency of diastase in the intestinal juices, which results 
in cm imperfect digestion of starch. Fermentation occurs in 
the colon with the production of much carbon dioxide. 

Symptoms, — ^The patient’s main complaints are a feeling 
of abdominal distension and discomfort, borborygmi, and the 
p€«8age of much flatus. The symptoms are often much 
aggravated at night, waking the patient and causing insomnia. 
Pain is unusual, but sometimes there is diarrhoea and colic 
due to a secondary colospasm. Much relief is experienced 
after the passage of flatus. 

Treatment. — There is no difficulty in the digestion of sugar, 
and therefore no need for this to be restricted. Free starch, 
as in flour and bread, is also usually well digested. The starch 
in root vegetables, rice, and potatoes is, however, enclosed 
in cellulose envelopes, and it is chiefly in this form that it 
reaches the caecum, when the digestion of starch in the small 
intestine is defective. In cases of intestinal carbohydrate 
dyspepsia it is therefore important to exclude completely from 
the diet potatoes, rice, and root vegetables. This alone is 
often sufficient to relieve the symptoms. In addition to 
dietetic restrictions, diastase tablets (5 gr. t.d.s.) may be taken 
and also 1 to 2 drachms of finely powdered charcoal thrice 
daily. As a result of treatment the excess of starch in the 
stools rapidly disappears, and the dietetic restrictions can be 
gradually relaxed. Potatoes, however, should be avoided 
permanently. 


INTUSSUSCEPTION 

In this condition a portion of the intestine, usually the ileum 
near the Ueo-caecal valve, is invaginated into the lumen of 
the bowel immediately below. Infants are far more often 
affected than adults, and in the former the symptoms are 
acute, whereas in the latter they are usually chronic. 

Acute Intussusception in Infants. — Male children are 
mainly affected and the disease is most common during 
the first year of life. The victims of acute intussusoeption 
are usually healthy, well-nourished infants, but slight gastro- 



INTUSSUSCEPTION 437 

inteBtinal upsets often immediately" precede the onset of 
intussusception. 

Symptoms . — ^The illness begins with colicky abdominal pain, 
which causes the child to scream ; soon after the onset, vomiting 
occurs, but is seldom repeated. After the passage of one or 
two normal motions, nothing but blood and mucus is passed. 
On palpation a sausage-shaped tumour is often felt lying trans- 
versely across the abdomen with its concavity downwards. 
This consists of the intussuscepted gut and may ultimately 
extend round into the left iliac fossa. There is no rigidity 
except during attacks of pain, but the abdomen may become 
distended. The pulse is rapid but the temperature remains 
subnormal. Unless the condition is relieved by operation, 
death is almost certain. 

Diagnosis . — In infants the passage of pure blood or blood 
and mucus quite unmixed with fsecal material and with no 
faecal odour, is practically diagnostic of intussusception. The 
typical tumour can often be felt, though occasionally an 
anaesthetic is necessary to enable it to be recognised. The 
only conditions with which acute intussusception is likely to 
be confused are acute colitis or Henoch’s purpura, which may 
indeed sometimes be complicated by intussusception ; in these 
conditions, however, there is practically always a faecal odour 
in the stools even if there be no obvious faecal material. 
Moreover, in acute colitis the onset is likely to be more gradual 
than in intussusception. 

TreatmerU . — Immediate operation is necessary. 

Chronic Intussusception. — Intussusception also occurs in 
adults, more commonly in males than in females ; the condition 
is usually brought about by the presence of a growth, either 
innocent or malignant, which forms the apex of the invaginated 
gut. The s^nnptoms point to an intermittent chronic obstruc- 
tion, often w'ith blood and mucus in the feces. Sometimes a 
palpable mass can be felt in the abdomen ; this may vary in 
size from time to time and may disappear completely owing 
to the bowel becoming disinvaginated, only to recur at a 
later date. Owing to the obstruction, colicky pains occur, 
and during the exacerbations there may be constijmtion and 
vomiting. Sometimes acute obstruction may supervene after 
a period of intermittent chronic obstruction. Often the 
condition is mistaken for a growth, and the true diagnosis 
is not made until laparotomy is performed. Treatment 
consists in early operation, at which the intussusception 
is reduced and a careful search mode for a caxise, such as 
a polypus or growth. 



438 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 


REGIONAL ENTERO-COLITIS (Crohn^s Disease) 

Crohn described as regional ileitis a condition in which the 
terminal ileum is found to be thickened, oedematous and 
ulcerated. As the caecum and not infrequently the ascending 
colon are also involved, Hurst has suggested that the condition 
should be described as regional entero-colitis. The aetiology 
remains obscure, but although histological examination is 
suggestive of tuberculosis tubercle bacilli have never been 
found in the lesions, and the disease is probably inflammatory 
in origin and non-tuberculous. The lumen of the affected 
ileum is much narrowed and there is a variable degree of 
obstruction. 

Symptoms are very variable : repeated attacks of colicky 
pain in the neighbourhood of the umbilicus or in the right 
iliac fossa ; abdominal distension ; tenderness in the right 
lower abdomen, where sometimes a sausage-shaped tumour is 
palpable ; slight pjrexia and polymorphonuclear leucocytosis ; 
occasionaDy diarrhoea. Occult blood is nearly always present 
in the faeces. There is a tendency in long-standing cases for 
fistulae to form between loops of intestine. The symptoms 
are usually slowly progressive and a definite diagnosis is seldom 
made except on the X-ray findings. After a barium meal 
repeated examinations of the terminal ileum are made at 
hourly intervals. Filling defects are seen in the terminal ileum, 
and the barium shows as a tliin irregular linear shadow con- 
necting the dilated coils of ileum to the caecum. This is known 
as the “ string sign ” from its appearance. 

Regional ileitis is likely to be mistaken for appendicitis, 
ileo-caecal tuberculosis or growth of the caecum. The only 
effective treatment is excision of the whole of the diseased 
area. 


APPENDICITIS 

Full descriptions of acute appendicitis in all its aspects 
are available in textbooks of surgery and here it is proposed 
to deal only with the condition often described as chronic 
appendicitis or appendicular dyspefjsia. 

The symptoms attributed to chronic appendicitis are often 
vague, variable and of many months or even years’ duration. 
Among the more common are abdominal discomfort or pain, 
usually epigastric or around the umbilicus, flatulence, and 
nausea. Sometimes in addition to epigastric discomfort the 



DISEASES OF THE COLON 


439 


patient may complain of short attacks of pain in the right 
iliac fossa. Deep palpation in this region elicits tenderness 
and sometimes also pain in the epigastrium. The pain differs 
from that of a peptic ulcer in having a less regular relationship 
to meals and it is seldom relieved by food or alkalis. It is 
often aggravated by exercise. 

A diagnosis of chronic appendicitis is never justifiable 
except after a thorough investigation to exclude other condi- 
tions such as an ulcer or cholecystitis. Moreover it is essential 
to confirm the diagnosis by X-ray examination. In about 
80 per cent, of cases it is possible to visualise the appendix, 
either with a barium meal or enema, and to demonstrate 
tenderness which is strictly localised to the appendix. If the 
appendix fails to fill with barium, particularly if the X-ray 
examination is repeated, this indicates a probability that its 
entry into the cascum is obstructed. Such findings in con- 
junction with suspicious symptoms suggests chronic appendicitis. 

During the last twenty years many victims have been 
sacrificed on the altar of chronic appendicitis. While it must 
be admitted that sometimes a complete cure is effected by 
appendicectomy, only too often the patient’s symptoms recur 
witliin a few months and may lead to further operations for 
adhesions. Ill-judged appendicectomy is often the prelude 
to many years of chronic invalidism. On no account should 
operation ever be undertaken except after the most careful 
investigations and the patient’s desire for operation [[should 
never be allowed to influence the decision. 

It is important to realise that recurrent attacks of acute 
appendicitis are entirely different from chronic appendicitis 
and call for early appendicectomy. 


DISEASES OF THE COLON 
Methods of Exaotnation 

The Sigmoidoscope. — The investigation and treatment of 
diseases of the colon has been greatly facilitated in recent years 
by the more frequent employment of the sigmoidoscope. With 
this instrument it is possible to obtain a clear view of the 
lower 10 in. of the alimentary canal, and the practical value of 
this is obvious when it is remembered that this is the portion 
of the colon which is specially liable to be involved by growths 
and ulcerative colitis. For a sigmoidosoopic examination it is 
rarely necessary to give an anaesthetic, either loca,! or general, 



440 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

and with reasonable care there is no danger of perforating the 
bowel. Moreover, the procedure is merely uncomfortable. 
Unless the patient is extremely constipated no preparation 
with purgatives or enemata is required. The latter are liable 
to produce redness of the mucous membrane, which may be 
mistaken for inflammation. The examination is made in the 
knee-elbow position. Before any attempt is made to pass 
the instrument, a rectal examination should always be made 
to exclude a growth low down in the rectum. The sigmoido- 
scope, thoroughly lubricated with vaseline and warmed to body 
temperature, is inserted gently through the anal canal ; when 
it has passed the anal sphincter, it is pushed in the direction 
of the sacrum through the first 2 in. of the rectum. The intro- 
ducer is then withdrawm and the further passage of the instru- 
ment is controlled by direct vision. It is most important not 
to push the instrument forward unless the lumen of the gut 
is clearly visible. At the upper end of the rectum, 4 in. from 
the anal canal, the pelvi-rectal flexure is clearly visible and the 
sigmoidoscope is manipulated around it into the pelvic colon. 
A carcinoma of the colon may be easily visible through the 
sigmoidoscope. It bleeds readily and will prevent further 
passage of the instrument. Swabs for bacteriological cultiva- 
tion can be taken from ulcers through the lumen of the sigmoido- 
scope. A proctoscope is valuable for inspection of the rectum 
and anal canal. 

X-ray Examination of the Colon. — Examination of the colon 
following a barium meal is not often of great value, except as 
indicating the rate at which the opaque meal passes round the 
colon into the rectum. A barium enema is more valuable in 
the diagnosis of organic disease, particularly cancer, divertic- 
ulitis, and ulcerative colitis. Barium is run into the rectum 
under a low pressure, while the patient is observed under the 
fluorescent screen. In normal persons the opaque fluid passes 
readily round the colon as far as the ca?cum within a few minutes. 
A partial stricture of the bowel, such as may result from a 
carcinoma, will often result in holding up the passage of the 
enema either indefinitely or for many minutes, and this occurs 
long before symptoms of intestinal obstruction develop. In 
addition to the delay in the passage of the opaque salt, there 
is sometimes a definite deformity or filling defect visible in the 
shadow cast by the affected region. 

Examination of the Fmces. — It is essential to insist on 
seeing the freoee, as this may reveal the presence of blood, 
mucus, or pus. This can be confirmed by a microscopical and 
chemical examination. 



DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 441 


CARCINOMA OP THE COLON 

Malignant growths of the colon and rectum are fairly 
common and may occur at a relatively early age. The most 
frequent site for the disease is the rectum, but in the colon 
itself the pelvic portion is most often affected, particularly 
the last few inches above the pelvi-rectal flexme. The early 
diagnosis of cancer of the colon and rectum is of the utmost 
importance, as the growths are often of relatively low 
malignancy and metastasis is slow. 

Symptoms. — These are extremely variable and depend on 
the situation of the growth and the degree of obstruction 
which it produces. 

1. Sudden onset of acute intestinal obstruction. This is 

likely to occur with growths of the pelvic colon which 
encircle the gut. 

2. An alteration in the bowel habits in a patient whose 

bowels previously have been regular. This alteration 
may be constipation or diarrhoea or more commonly 
alternation of the two. 

3. Visible or occult blood in the faeces. Visible blood is 

chiefly seen in carcinoma of the rectum or pelvic 
colon. Occult blood in considerable amount is an 
almost invariable finding. 

4 . Abdominal pain. This may be absent but there are 

often attacks of colicky pain across the lower abdomen 
or more vague feelings of discomfort or distension. 
The |min is definitely related to defsecation. 

5. Tenesmus is frequent with growths in or near the rectum. 

6. Loss of weight and cachexia only occur late, but some- 

times there may be a persistent pyrexia. 

7. Haemorrhoids often develop as a result of a carcinoma of 

the rectum. 

Growths involving the ca 3 cum are less likely to produce 
obstructive symptoms than are those in the more distal portions 
of the colon. This is due to the relatively liquid character of the 
contents of the caecum. They may, however, give rise to con- 
siderable anaemia from long-continued bleeding. In such cases 
although there may be no visible blood in the faeces occult blood 
is present in large amounts, and spectroscopic examination of the 
faeces shows well-marked acid haematin absorption bands. 

The diarrhoea which is so frequent a feature of carcinoma 
of the rectum and sigmoid is a pseudo-diarrhoea, in which 



442 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

liquid faeces only, usually containing much visible blood, pus, 
and mucus, are able to pass the stricture produced by the growth. 
Above this the colon is loaded with solid faecal material, and is 
sometimes palpable in the left iliac fossa. In such cases obstruction 
may become complete and the patient develop acute symptoms. 

Pain is a very variable feature. Often it is slight and 
associated with defaecation, but occasionally there may be 
severe attacks which simulate biliary colic. Vomiting is 
uncommon except with definite obstruction. 

On phjTsical examination in the early stages little definite 
information is obtained, unless the growth be palpable on rectal 
examination. With involvement of the caecum a mass may be 
palpable, but growths of the splenic flexure and the pelvic 
colon are usually too deeply seated to be felt. The rectum is 
usually found to be empty and ballooned. 

Diagnosis. — It is impossible to stress too strongly the 
importance of making a thorough digital examination of the 
rectum in every case of piles or where some irregularity of 
the bowels, whether constipation or diarrhoea, has lasted for more 
than a fortnight. If nothing be found on rectal examination, 
the patient must be persuaded to undergo the slight discomfort 
of a sigmoidoscopic examination. With the adoption of such 
a procedure as a routine, probably some 50 per cent, or more 
of growths of the colon would be diagnosed early. The stools 
must be carefully and repeatedly examined for visible or 
occult blood and a barium enema should also be carried out 
(vide p. 440). A “ follow through ” with a barium meal is less 
likely to be helpful, and if there is any clinical evidence of 
obstruction, such as constipation, distension, or vomiting, the 
additional obstruction produced by barium may precipitate 
acute symptoms. 

Other pathological conditions may closely simulate 
carcinoma of the colon. Most important of these is ulcerative 
colitis, in which case, however, the diagnosis at once becomes 
clear on sigmoidoscopic examination. Diverticulitis, chronic 
intussusception, regional entero-colitis and hypertrophic csecal 
tuberculosis may all simulate carcinoma of the colon, but can 
usually be differentiated by the clinical history and radiological 
findings. Faecal impaction in the rectum, especially in elderly 
patients may give rise to suspicion, but rectal examination 
reveals the true condition. 

Treatment. — Surgical removal of the growth at the earliest 
possible moment is obviously indicated, where the condition 
is not too advanced. Failing this colostomy may give temporary 
relief. 



ULCERATIVE COLITIS 


443 


Polyposis op the Colon 

Single polypi are comparatively common in the colon and 
rectum and may cause hemorrhage or intussusception. They 
are also liable to become carcinomatous. There is, however, a 
rare condition, often familial, in which there are multiple 
polypi throughout the colon. Ulceration and hsemorrhage 
occur and the stools resemble those of ulcerative colitis. Some 
of the polypi almost invariably become malignant and this 
usually occurs in early adult hfe. Diagnosis is easy on sigmoido- 
scopic examination, and a barium enema will show up polypi 
beyond the reach of the sigmoidoscope as translucent areas 
{vide Plate 18). Bleeding may be considerable and the patient 
becomes severely anaemic. The outlook as regards develop- 
ment of carcinoma is so bad that colectomy should be advised. 
Polypi within reach of the sigmoidoscope must be destroyed 
by diathermy, and the patient should be sigmoidoscoped at 
six-monthly intervals to detect early recurrence of polypi. 
Poly{K)si8 also occurs in chronic ulcerative cohtis. 


ULCERATIVE COLITIS 

Ulceration of the colon may occur in toxsemic conditions, 
particularly in uraemia, and it is a constant feature of both 
amoebic and bacillary dysentery {vide pp. 190 and 186). The 
term ulcerative colitis is, however, applied to a well-defined 
clinical condition in which the colon is inflamed and ulcerated. 

iEtiolosy and Pathology. — In spite of the immense amount 
of energy which has been expended on the study of ulcerative 
colitis in recent years there is no real agreement as to its nature 
and aetiology. Various organisms, such as dysentery bacilli 
and Bargen’s diploooccus, have been accused of playing a 
causal role, but the evidence in favour of such theories is far 
from convincing, although sometimes the serum of patients 
with ulcerative colitis agglutinates dysenteric bacilli. Unlike 
dysentery, the disease is not infectious. It may weU be argued 
that the ulceration of the colon may be due to the excretion 
of toxins into the colon rather than to a direct infection of its 
lining. The importance of psychological factors has been 
emphasised in the setiology of ulcerative colitis. The disease 
is prone to occur in psy^ologically abnormal people under 
emotional stress, and relapses not infrequently follow psychic 
trauma. It is undoubtedly true that muco-membranous colitis 



444 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

[vide p. 446) is invariably associated with abnormal types of 
personality, but these cases rarely if ever develop ulcerative 
colitis. Most gastro-intestinal diseases are liable to be aggra- 
vated by worry and anxiety, but it is diflScult to regard them 
as primarily due to an abnormal psychological state. 

Knowledge of the morbid anatomy of the disease has been 
advanced in recent years by the use of the sigmoidoscope and 
the X-ray. Whereas in the past we were o]dy familiar with 
the advanced changes seen at autopsy, it is now possible to 
obtain a direct view through the sigmoidoscope of the mucous 
membrane of the rectum and lower portion of the pelvic colon 
as they occur in the early stages of the disease and during the 
process of healing. Before obvious ulcers have formed or after 
they have he€ded the mucous lining of the colon instead of being 
shiny and moist appears velvety and granular and bleeds readily 
even with the gentle passage of the sigmoidoscope. This 
condition, which is similar to that in acute bacillary dysentery, 
is a diffuse one and may affect the whole of the visible mucous 
membrane. As the disease progresses necrosis occurs and 
superficial ulcers are formed which in severe cases become so 
numerous that practically no mucous membrane remains. In 
the more chronic cases the submucosa is invaded by a diffuse 
fibrosis, which eventually reduces the colon to a relatively 
narrow tube, which when visualised with a barium enema 
shows a complete lack of the normal haustration. Such a 
colon with its lack of distenaibility and its relatively narrow 
diameter is incapable of storing its contents, thus accounting 
for the persistent and intractable diarrhoea (vide Plate 19). 

In the more chronic types of ulcerative colitis fibrous 
strictures may occur and sometimes polypoid adenomata 
develop, which occasionally imdergo carcinomatous changes. 
Perforation is extremely uncommon. The part of the colon 
mainly affected is the rectum and pelvic colon, but often 
the whole organ from the caecum] to jthe rectum may be 
involved. 

Symptoms. — Even when the onset is apparently acute, 
careful inquiry often shows that the patient has had at times 
slight symptoms such as haemorrhage. Usually the onset is 
gr^ual with diarrhoea as the main symptom. At first the 
stools are loose, but blood and mucus appear early. As 
secondaiy infection of the ulcers occurs pus in the stools becomes 
very obvious. Faecal material is nearly always present in 
contrast to the stools of a^te bacillary dysentery. There is 
sometiines tenesmus and colicky pain, especially immediately 
before defascation, but severe abdo minal pain is tmusual. The 



.ur. 


(From pJito 


I*I..\TK Is 

l<)l\p()sis of tiu' ((tlmi .shown aftrr nijfrtiou of l•anunl ami 
h\ O. A. Mar.MT.) 


I To face jHi^e 4 U 




ULCERATIVE COLITIS 


446 


general condition of the patient is very variable and probably 
depends on the extent of involvement of the colon by the 
ulcerative process. When the colon is widely involved, fever 
and tachycardia are often prominent features and the patient's 
general condition is obviously bad. Even apart from severe 
hflemorrhage a profound secondary anaemia may develop. 
Remissions and relapses are frequent, and it is doubtful 
whether any patient can be said with certainty to be com- 
pletely and permanently cured. Fistula in ano and anal fissures 
are distressing complications. 

Differential Diagnosis. — Carcinoma coli may produce stools 
indistinguishable from those of ulcerative colitis. Fortunately 
sigmoidoscopy rarely leaves the diagnosis in doubt, for in 
ulcerative colitis the rectum and lower portion of the pelvic 
colon are almost invariably affected, and if these portions are 
seen to be normal in a patient who is passing blood and mucus 
it is almost certain that there is a growth beyond the reach of 
the Bigmoido8co|>e. Carcinomata of the rectum and pel vi -rectal 
flexure are readily visible through the instrument. In amoebic 
dysentery the ulcers are deeper though less extensive and their 
edges more undermined. 

Treatment. — In few diseases is there so great a divergence 
of views as to treatment. Surgery, medicated colon washouts, 
anti-dysenteric serum, intestinal antiseptics, vaccines, sulphona- 
mides, vitamins, strange diets, such as apples, all have their 
advocates. There are, however, two outstanding facts : first, 
that the earlier treatment is begun the better ; secondly, 
that prolonged rest in bed and a high calorie diet are of 
undoubted value. 

Diet . — This should be liberal, as the disease lasts for many 
months and it is important to maintain the nutrition of the 
patient. Vegetables and fruits which contain much non- 
absorbable cellulose must be forbidden, but fruit juice is 
desirable. Finely powdered animal charcoal in doses of 2 
draohim or kaolin in ^ oz. doses often helps to reduce distension 
and relieves discomfort from flatulence. 

Colon WashotUs . — ^These are undesirable in acute cases, 
and even in the more chronic types their value is doubtful. 
Warm normal saline is preferable to the solutions of tannic 
acid (1 gr. to 1 oz.) which are often employed. 

More valuable than washouts are rectal injections of 
bismuth subgallate (dermatol), particularly where the rectum 
^d lower pelvic colon is m ainly involved. This drug is given 
in a mucilage made of coreine or isogel flakes (1 drachm of 
coreine in 4 oz. of water) ; 4 gr. of dermatol are added to each 



446 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

ounce of the mucilage and from 4 to 8 oz. of the emulsion are 
injected through a soft rubber catheter into the rectum, and 
is retained, if possible, all night. If nocturnal diarrhoea is 
troublesome 5 to 15 minims of tincture of opium may be added 
to the rectal injection or ^ to 1 gr. of codeine may be given 
by mouth. 

Anti-dysenteric Serum , — The value of this is doubtful but 
it should be tried if the patient’s serum agglutinates dysenteric 
bacilli. It is best given intramuscularly in ten daily doses of 
10 c.c. of concentrated polyvalent serum. 

Blood Transfusion , — This is often of the greatest value, 
even when the patient is not severely anaemic. It probably 
acts by improving the resistance of the patient. Sever^ 
transfusions of half a pint should be given on alternate days. 
Large doses of iron should also be given. 

Surgery . — Deostomy is undoubtedly sometimes a life-saving 
operation, particularly in acute cases with grave toxaemia. 
Appendicostomy and caecostomy are now seldom performed. 
FoUowing ileostomy some patients put on weight and the colon 
may even appear to heal. Colectomy has been successfully 
performed following ileostomy. 

Prognosis. — Unfavourable features are a persistently rapid 
pulse-rate, widespread involvement of the colon, particularly of 
the caecum and ascending colon, or the presence of a stricture. 
The X-ray appearances are of great value. If the colon is 
small and completely tubular with no haustrations in any 
portion, no lasting improvement can be expected. The mortality 
in hospital is usually about 20 per cent., but if the patients 
are traced for some years it is considerably higher. 


MUCO-MEMBRANOUS COLITIS 

Although the term colitis ought theoretically to be reserved 
for definitely inflanimatory lesions of the colon, the name 
mucous colitis or muco-membranous colitis has long been 
applied to a definite clinical condition characterised by 
obstinate constipation with mucus in the stools, although 
there is no inflammatory process comparable to that found in 
ulcerative cohtis. 

Mucous colitis is far more frequently seen in females than 
in males, and usually occurs in early middle life. Its victims 
are found among the rich rather than the poor, and in addition 
to their abdominal symptoms there is always a marked neurotic 
element. In the more severe and long-standing cases the 



MUCO-MEMBRANOUS COLITIS 


447 


intestinal functions acquire an almost complete monopoly of 
the patient’s thoughts and activities, so much so that the 
character of their faeces becomes the main interest in life. 

The characteristic symptoms of muco-membranous cohtis are 
constipation, the passage of mucus in the stools, and sometimes 
abdominal pain. The mucus may be excreted in unformed 
masses, but more frequently it occurs in the form of long strips, 
somewhat suggestive of a tape- worm. In severe cases there 
are complete casts of the colon which may be many inches in 
length. Microscopical examination of the mucus shows the 
presence in it of a few desquamated epithehal cells, but no 
pus cells. The faeces themselves are hard and scybalous unless 
the patient has taken violent purges, which may induce a 
transient attack of diarrhoea. The mucus is secreted by the 
glands of the colonic mucous membrane, under the combined 
influence of a hyperirritable nervous system and an obstinate 
constipation Owing to the unfortunate mental attitude of 
the patient, the symptoms are grossly exaggerated and the 
passage of mucus causes the most intense mental agitation, 
even though it may be accompanied by no other symptoms. 
Not infrequently there is in addition a spastic condition of the 
colon, which may often be felt on palpation to be firmly con- 
tracted. Such spasticity is often the cause of abdominal pain, 
which is aggravated by the taking of powerful purges. ITie 
most frequent site for pain is dowm the left side of tlie abdomen 
and in the left ihac fossa. Sigmoidoscopic examination shows 
a normal mucous membrane, but spasm of the circular muscle 
of the gut throws the mucous membrane into folds and tends 
to obliterate the lumen. In chronic cases where powerful 
purgatives have been employed there may be some congestion 
and slight bleeding. In addition to the mucus in the stools, 
there is occasionally the passage of intestinal “ sand,” consisting 
of reddish-brown granules of the insoluble calcium soaps of 
pahnitic and stearic acids. 

The treatment of severe cases of muco-membranous colitis is 
one of the most trying tasks that besot the medical practitioner. 
Only too often the patient has already tried every conceivable 
fine of treatment, and visits her doctor with an mialterable 
determination not to get well. In addition she is often re- 
garded as a heroic martyr to her health by anxious relatives. 
In consequence the outlook is most unfavourable. 

An attempt miwt be made to deal with the constipation, 
^d at the beginning of treatment it is important to get the 
bowels completely emptied, an object which is best attained 
by the combined use of castor oil and enemata. Subsequently 



448 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

copious doses of liquid paraflSn should prevent a fresh accumula- 
tion of faeces, and in addition rectal injections of warm olive 
oil may be given at night and retained till the morning. Where 
the constipation can be shown to be due to stasis in the upper 
part of the colon, the action of the paraffin may be reinforced 
by taking an infusion of senna po^, but all more powerful 
purgatives must be absolutely prohibited. 

As the colon is abnormally irritable the diet should consist 
of foods which leave little residue, and imoooked green vegetables 
or fruits with skins or pips must be avoided. The inclusion of 
coarse articles of food such as bran which act as a stimulant 
to the peristalsis of a normal intestine is likely to produce an 
increase in the secretion of mucus. 

When there is spasticity of the colon a useful prescription 
is tinct. belladonnae n\v, tinct. hyoscyami n\xx, aq. menth. pip. 
ad Jss. t.d.s. p.c. Smoking should be forbidden. Vaccines 
are of no value, while all forms of operation, such as colopexy, 
short circuit, or colectomy are disastrous. 

Mucous colitis is treated by colon washouts at spas, such 
as Plombi^res, Harrogate, and Buxton. On the whole it is 
best to avoid anything in the nature of regular enemata or 
colon washouts, as such treatment tends to make the patient 
concentrate her attention on her colon. Such successes as are 
obtained by spa treatment are probably due not so much to 
the special properties of the waters as to the regularity of the 
life and the expectation of cure on the part of the patient, 
which is fostered by the whole atmosphere of treatment. 

Anjdiiing which will serve to distract the patient s attention 
from her complaint is of value. Unfortunately, most of those 
afflicted with the disease are blessed, or perhaps cursed, with 
sufficient money to relieve them of any need to earn a living. 
Plenty of open air and exercise are indicated, but care must be 
taken to avoid cold, particularly upon the abdomen. 


DIVERTICULITIS 

Both at autopsy and in X-ray examinations of the colon 
small diverticula are found in about 5 to 10 per cent, of persons 
over middle age. These diverticula are most frequently en- 
countered in the pelvic colon, though they may occur throughout 
its length. They are more common in the male sex, but there 
is little evidence that they are specially frequent in the obese. 
In many cases they appear to cause no symptoms and the 
condition has been term^ by Spriggs diverticuUms, The exact 





i'LATK JO 

Hi V « f 1 1 ' ulit i'* ((f 'IIh' \ wiTi' takfri Ix'forf fiful 1 1 ciit iitcnt 

(From j.Uti- hy (> A Mar\i*r.| 


io Jure jHige I r.». 


btVERWCULlMS 44d 

mechanism by which diverticula are produced is uncertain, 
but there is no evidence that they are due to constipation. 

If the openings of diverticula become narrow, faecal material 
may stagnate in the pouches and infection supervenes. This 
gives rise to symptoms and the condition is then described as 
diverticulitis. The inflammatory changes lead to thickening 
of the affected area of the colon, which becomes adherent to 
surrounding structures. Sometimes perforation may occur with 
the formation of localised abscesses, or adhesions to the bladder 
may cause urinary symptoms or even a colo-vesical fistula. 

Symptoms. — Abdominal symptoms vary according as the 
inflammatory process is acute or chronic. In the acute form 
acute appendicitis may be simulated, except that the pain, 
tenderness and rigidity are in the left iliac fossa. As a rule 
the acute process subsides, sometimes with the formation of 
an abscess. Acute perforation is very rare. 

In the more usual chronic types of diverticulitis the 
symptoms may occur intermittently for many years with 
exacerbations and remissions. Abdominal pain, chiefly in the 
left lower abdomen, is the most frequent complaint. It is 
often aggravated by defecation. The bowels tend to be 
constipated and irregular, but diarrhoea is unusual. Visible 
blood in the stools is uncommon. Occult blood, however, 
particularly haematoporphyrin, is often present. Dysuria may 
indicate adhesion of the inflamed diverticula to the bladder. 
On physical examination there is usually tenderness in the 
left iliac fossa and sometimes a sausage^shaped tumour may 
be palpable. Occasionally intestinal obstruction develops, but 
this is usually gradual in onset. During the acute or subacute 
phases of the disease there is fever and a polymorphonuclear 
leucocytosis. 

Localised abscesses may form large abdominal tiunours 
and may burst into the bladder, vagina or colon. 

Diagnosis. — This can usually be settled by a barium enema, 
which may demonstrate not only the diverticula filled with 
barium but also sometimes the presence of polyps and narrowing 
of the lumen of the gut. It is important to remember that the 
mere discovery of diverticula does not necessarily mean that 
the patient is suffering from diverticulitis. With carcinoma 
of the colon there is more likely to be diarrhoea or obvious 
blood and mucus in the stools, and a barium enema will show 
a localised filling defect. Moreover, in most cases of diverticulitis 
the long history makes a growth of the colon improbable. 

Treatment. — In severe cases with obstruction, colostomy or 
resection of the affected portion of colon may be required. 



460 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENtARY CANAL 

In the more common milder forms of diverticulitis, a diet 
without much unabsorbable residue, plenty of paraflSn, and 
saline colon washouts may relieve the symptoms. In addition, 
a mixture containing tincture of belladonna IH^v and tincture 
of hyoscyamus TI\xxx may relieve spasm. A few ounces of 
warm liquid paraflBin should be injected into the rectum and 
retained over night. 


HIRSCHSPRUNG’S DISEASE 

This interesting though rare condition consists of great 
dilatation and hypertrophy of the colon, particularly in its 
distal portions. It is also known as megacolon and idiopathic 
dilatation of the colon. 

Hirschsprung’s disease is usually congenital, but it some- 
times is first discovered in adult life. Possibly the condition 
is analogous to achalasia of the cardia {vide p. 394), being due 
to a failure of the anal sphincter to relax. This obstructs the 
evacuation of the colon, which consequently becomes enor- 
mously dilated and hypertrophied. Owing to irritation by 
retained faeces the mucous lining of the colon may become 
ulcerated. 

The symptoms are very variable. In adults they may be 
few apart from constipation and colonic flatulence. In early 
life they are often severe, intractable constipation, abdominal 
distension, malnutrition and sometimes obstruction. The 
enormous dilatation of the splenic flexure may push the 
diaphragm upwards and produce dyspnoea. Occasionally 
patients complain of severe attacks of colicky pain simulating 
obstructions, but as a rule these pass off spontaneously. 

On examination the abdomen is distended and the outline 
of portions of the dilated colon is obvious. The diagnosis is 
rea^y confirmed by a barium enema. Between 6 and 8 pints 
of the emulsion are required to fill the dilated colon, as compared 
with about 2 pints for the normal colon. 

Treatment. — If the patient has been constipated for a long 
period and the rectum is filled with scybala, it may be necessary 
to give an ansesthetic and remove the contents manually or 
with a spoon. A wide bore tube must be manipulated into the 
colon and its contents thoroughly washed out. Once evacuated, 
the colon must not be allow^ to refill. This object can 
sometimes be attained by daily dilatation of the anal sphincter 
with a tapered bougie, which is kept in position for 15 minutes 
before attempts at defsecation. Often daily saline washouts 



VISCEROPTOSIS 


451 


are necessary. Lumbar sympathectomy rarely produces good 
results but spinal angesthesia often relieves symptoms, and the 
improvement persists for long periods. 

Megacolon in adults often causes little disability and is 
consistent 'mth continued good health and activity. In children 
the outlook is usually said to be imfavourable, but often this 
is not the case. 


VISCEROPTOSIS 

During the last twenty years ideas as to the position of the 
normal stomach and intestines have been revolutionised by 
radiological investigations, and it is now generally recognised 
that in many normal individuals, particularly those with 
elongated chests and a narrow epigastric angle, the abdominal 
viscera may lie at a very much lower level in the abdomen, 
when the patient is in the vertical position, than was formerly 
thought to be consistent with health. The mere fact, therefore, 
that there is some degree of ptosis of the stomach or colon is 
not in itself a proof of disease. Moreover, it is very doubtful 
whether symptoms so frequently ascribed to visceroptosis are 
really connected with the position of the abdominal viscera. 

The abdominaJ viscera are maintained in position by the 
pressure exerted by the muscles of the abdominal wall and of 
the pelvic floor, rather than as the result of tension upon the 
various peritoneal ligaments. Although it is usually assumed 
that loss of tone in the abdominal muscles lowers the intra- 
abdominal pressure and leads to ptosis, it is nevertheless a fact 
that many individuals with unduly lax abdominal muscles 
show no radiological evidence of ptosis. It is now becoming 
widely realised that a diagnosis of visceroptosis was often made 
on quite insufficient grounds and included many patients 
suffering from nervous dyspepsia, muco-membranous colitis, 
anxiety neuroses and chronic abdominal invalidism. 

In the past it has been customary to describe separately 
symptoms ascribed to the ptosis of individual organs. In 
actual fact when the abdominal viscera are unusually low in 
the abdomen not one single organ, such as the stomach or 
colon, is involved but to a greater or lees extent all. 

In a very limited numl^r of conditions ptosis of an organ 
may produce definite symptoms. 

1. Gastroptosis. — ^As a general rule when the stomach is 
ptosed the second portion of the duodenum is also low and 
there is no obstruction to the evacuation of the gastric contents. 
Occasionally, however, this portion of the duodenum which 



462 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

is retroperitoneal, remains attached at a relatively high level 
in the abdomen, although the pylorus'and first portion of the 
duodenum are dropped. In su<^ a ease there is a sharp kink 
at the junction of the first and second portions of the duodenum, 
which may produce an obstruction to the passage of the gastric 
contents. This is only the case when the patient is in the 
erect position. When recumbent the stomach lies at a higher 
level and the kinking disappears. If the patient is X-rayed 
it can be seen that there is gastric stasis in the erect posture 
and definite gastric delay. L 3 dng down the stomach empties 
in normal time. In these rather imusual oases the patient 
may complain of a sensation of weight and distension after 
meals, which is relieved by lying down, especially on the right 
side. Meals should be small and rather frequent and the patient 
should lie down for half an hour or more after meals. Surgical 
interference is unlikely to be successful, but possibly an 
abdominal belt may help to relieve the symptoms. 

2. Chronic Duodenal Deus. — ^The duodenum is sometimes 
constricted at the point where it is crossed by the mesentery 
and the mesenteric vessels. This produces a dilatation of the 
proximal part of the duodenum. The condition can be definitely 
diagnosed only by X-ray examinations, but it may give rise 
to vague symptoms of right-sided discomfort. Sometimes the 
duodenal stasis may be associated with a duodenal ulcer. The 
condition is often the result of a general enteroptosis, as 
the weight of the small intestine pulls on the mesentery and 
constricts the duodenum. Relief can often only be obtained 
by operation. 

3. Nephroptosis. — Although the kidneys are not part of the 
alimentary tract, ptosis of these organs practically never occurs 
apart from a general visceroptosis, and the subject of nephro- 
ptosis or movable kidney is best dealt with in this connection 
rather than imder the heading of renal diseases. The ptosis 
is always more apparent on the right side owing to the close 
relationship between the right kidney and the hepatic flexure 
of the colon. In most cases there are no symptoms, except 
those produced by suggestion on the part of an imprudent 
medical attendant, who teUs the patient that the kidney is 
displaced. Occasionally there may be a dragging pain in the 
loin, with attacks of severe colic similar in type to those which 
occur as the result of a stone in the ureter. Such attacks, 
which are termed Dietl'a crisea, are the result of a kinking of 
the ureter with partial obstruction of its lumen, and are usually 
due to the presence of an aberrant rexial artery. 

Apart &om the conditions described above it is doubtful 



VISCEROPTOSIS 


453 


whether visceroptosis produces any symptoms. Those ascribed 
to the condition are nausea, anorexia, abdominal discomfort 
and pain, chronic constipation, the passage of mucus in the 
stools, loss of weight, general malnutrition and ill-health. 
Often in addition the patient suffers from insomnia, palpitation, 
and fatigue, physical and mental. Such patients are nearly 
always females and there is often evidence that even from 
childJiood they have been imder average in physique and 
stamina. Unmarried and childless women form the majority, 
and the domestic environment is often unsatisfactory. 

Unfortunately a diagnosis of visceroptosis is usually 
welcomed by the patient, to whom it appears a satisfactory 
explanation of her numerous and manifold complaints. More- 
over, it is an idea which it is very much easier to implant than 
to eradicate from the mind of the patient. It is therefore 
unwise ever to suggest to a patient that the viscera are dropped 
or displaced, except perhaps in cases of definite duodenal ileus 
or Dietl’s crises, where the condition calls for surgery. 

Ptosis of the colon does not produce kinking at the flexures 
and the constipation which is so often found in these patients 
is due to dyschezia and not to delay in the colon. 

Occasionally the liver or ' spleen may be abnormally low, 
but few if any symptoms are produced except in the rare cases 
where there is torsion of the pedicle of the spleen. 

Treatment. — It is important to exclude organic disease by 
a thorough investigation, as a general condition of ill-health 
may be produced by tuberculous infection, or the abdominal 
sjmiptoms may be due to an atypical peptic ulcer. If all 
investigations prove negative it is essential that the medical 
attendant shoidd not allow the patient to gain the impression 
that her symptoms are being regarded as imaginary. Such an 
idea will at once undermine her confidence in her doctor and 
lead to a lack of co-operation, which will render any attempt 
at treatment hopeless. 

It must be realised that most of these patients are con- 
stitutionally of poor physique and low resistance. An attempt 
must be made to persu^e them to adapt themselves and their 
regime to this fact. They need more rest than a normal person, 
and over-exertion, either physical or mental, only produces 
aggravation of their symptoms. When, as so frequently 
happens, the domestic environment is unhappy a frank and 
sympathetic talk may be beneficial. 

As regards the diet, these patients are often undernourished. 
Often they have out out successively various articles of diet 
on the assumption that these disagree with them. The ultimate 



464 DISEASES OF THE ALIMENTARY CANAL 

result may be chrouio inanition. There is no need to restrict 
the diet and often they feel better if they can be persuaded 
to take more food. In view of the frequency of an irritable 
colon and mucous colitis it is wise to avoid foods with much 
unabsorbable residue. If constipation is a prominent feature 
it should be treated on the lines described on page 433. 

Abdominal belts undoubtedly are often helpful. Although 
it can be shown by X-ray examination that a belt does not 
appreciably raise the position of the stomach or other viscus, 
it is possible that by raising the intra-abdominal pressure it may 
prevent stagnation of blo^ in the splanchnic area and thereby 
improve the circulation. A webbing and elastic belt is more 
co^ortable than one made of leather and metal . Certainly many 
patients obtain moral, if not physical, support by wearing a belt. 

The best hope of restoring tone to the abdominal muscles 
is by means of carefully selected exercises involving active rather 
than passive movements. Such exercises should be performed 
under the supervision of an expert in remedial exercises. 
The exercises consist mainly of active movements by the 
abdominal muscles and the diaphragm, which in most of these 
patients is unduly low with a restricted respiratory excursion. 
Breathing exercises are carried out lying on the back with the 
legs drawn up and the thorax partially fixed by the arms 
folded over the chest ; the breathing is thiis rendered mainly 
diaphragmatic in type. Such exercises must be carried out 
daily at home, as well as under supervision. 

In the past ail sorts of surgical operations, ranging from 
appendioectomy to colectomy, were performed on these un- 
fortimate patients. Happily at the present time ojierative 
treatment has practically disappeared, except occasionally for 
duodenal ileus or Dietl’s crises. Not unfrequently one opera- 
tion led to another and the results were disastrous. 

Unfortunately many of the patients labelled as visceroptosis 
have reached such a condition of chronic invalidism that no 
cure can be even hoped for, and this is specially the case in 
those upon whom operations have been performed. 

Drugs are seldom of much value apart from bromide to assuage 
anxiety and a belladonna and hyoscyamus mixture {vide p. 460) 
when colospasm is present. 


J. J. Ck)NYBBABK. 



DISEASES OF THE LIVER, GALL- 
BLADDER, PANCREAS, AND 
PERITONEUM 

DISEASES OF THE UVER 

The Estimation of Hepatic Efficiency 

A C AREFUL survey of the symptoms and signs still remains 
by far the most accurate guide regarding the functional 
oa])acity of the liver. The remarkable regenerative power 
of the liver and the wide margin of safety which it possesses 
makes it difficult to assass the degree of damage from any cause. 
In the pri^sence of obvious structural damage the functional 
ability of the liver may be unimpaired as measured by any 
single test. The efficiency of the many functions has necessarilj^ 
to be gauged by a variety of observations or tests, with con- 
clusions drawn from the composite picture. These ma}^ be 
discussed briefly. 

The presence of urobilin in the urine is the most delicate 
indication of parenchymal inefficiency. The frequent occurrence 
of jaundice in liver disease makes the van den Bergh test 
valuable (see below) in measuring the degree of jaundice, 
though it does not reveal the cAuse. The bromsulphalein test 
measures the liver’s ability to excrete a foreign dye substance, 
but while it is a test of liver function, it is not valuable in 
differential diagnosis nor of much practical value. Inability 
of the liver to form the normal amount of prothrombin, in 
spite of an adequate supply of vitamin K, is a sign of severe 
damage. This is measured by the clotting time of blood plasma 
under certain fixed conditions, i.c., prothrombin time. 

The concentration of plasma proteins is influenced by the 
liver. In certain forms of liver damage the plasma albumin 
decreases and the globulin increases. This alteration in the 
ratio of the plasma proteins and the presence of abnormal 
globulins may occur in early cirrhosis and is the basis for such 



456 


DISEASES OF LIVER 

tests as (1) the oephalin-cholesterol flocculation test ; (2) the 
colloidal gold test ; (3) the Takata-Ara test. 

The ability of the liver to detoxify certain substances can 
be measured by the hippuric acid excretion test. Sodium 
benzoate is given either by mouth or intravenously, and the 
liver’s efficiency in conjugating it with amino -acetic acid to 
hippuric acid is demonstrated by the appearance of hippuric 
acid in the urine during the next few hours. 

The galactose test is useful in measuring the capacity of 
the liver to convert sugars into glycogen. Galactose is practi- 
cally not utilisable by any other tissue, and if present in the 
circulation is passed in the urine. Under fasting conditions, 
if 40 grm. of pure galactose are administered by mouth in 
250 to 500 c.c. of water, then in the next five hours less than 
1 grm. of sugar is excreted normally in the urine. Any appreci- 
able inefficiency of liver is shown by there being at least 2 grm., 
and when severe more than 3 grm. of sugar in the urine during 
the whole five-hour period. Cases of toxic and infective hepatic 
jaundice show the greatest glycosuria, while in obstructive 
jaundice (early or late stage) the test gives a normal result. 
Though of great assistance it is not an infallible guide in the 
differential diagnosis between obstructive and parenchymal 
jaundice. 

Jaundice ( Icterus) 

By jaundice is meant visible staining of the tissues with 
bile pigment. By special teste its earliest appearance can be 
demonstrated in the blood plasma, but as deposition in the 
tissues occurs, it becomes visible in the conjunct! vse, mucous 
membranes of the mouth, the skin of the face, and finally of 
the whole body. It is due either to mechanical defects in the 
outflow of bile from obstruction of the ducts, to morbid processes 
in the liver cells themselves, or more rarely it is associated with 
excessive haemolysis of red cells. Thus jaundice may bo 
classified as: (1) obstructive hepatic jaundice; (2) toxic or 
infective hepatic jaundice ; (3) haemolytic jaundice. 

Bilirubin, which is formed from haemoglobin, is normally 
present in the blood plasma in a small but constant amount. 
The estimation of bilirubin in body fluids by the application 
of van den Bergh’s diazo-reaction has given great im]K;$tus to 
the investigation of hepatic disease and to the study of the 
formation of bile pigment. It is recognised that bilirubin 
can be made quite apart from the liver by the cells of the 
** reticulo-endothelial system.** 

|The]|B6ticiilo*endotbelial Syitem. — Aschoff introduced this 



JAUNDICE 


467 


term to describe a system of endothelial cells widely distributed 
throughout the interstitial and perivascular tissues of the 
body ; they are especially important in the liver (Kiipffer 
cells), spleen, bone marrow, lymph glands, connective tissue 
and circulating blood. 

One characteristic function of these phagocytic cells is the 
formation of bilirubin from haemoglobin. Though the Kiipffer 
cells lying along the venous capillaries of the liver are repre- 
sentative of this “ system,” yet they contribute but a small 
fraction of the whole number of reticulo -endothelial cells "bf 
the body. For this rea^n the role of the liver as a site for the 
production of bilirubin is proix)rtionately negligible, and the 
polygonal cells which make up the main mass of the liver are 
concerned with the excretion of bilirubin manufactured else- 
where. The amount found in the blood in health is a small 
but definite quantity. The bone marrow and spleen are the 
most important sources. The process of bile formation consists 
in the removal of bilirubin from the blood, its conversion by 
the liver cells, and its final excretion into the bile canaliculi. 
In hepatic disease this selection and excretion of bile pigment 
is often disturbed so that the bilirubin in the blood plasma 
is increased in amount and may be changed in quality as well. 
These facts are of great importance in consideration of the 
different forms of jaundice. 

Measurement of Bilirubinsemia. — While there is no satis- 
factory method at present for the determination of bile acids 
in the blood plasma, the content of bile pigment can be estimated 
accurately by van den Bergh’s diazo -reaction. Blood plasma 
containing bilirubin, when treated with van den Bergh’s 
diazo -reagent, gives a colour reaction which varies with the 
character of the bilirubin. In one type a reddish violet colour 
appears either at once or in a few moments, and is knovu as 
the “ direct ” reaction ; in another the colour is produced 
only in the presence of alcohol, after precipitation of the 
proteins, and is known as the “ indirect ” reaction. It is used 
in the quantitative estimation of the pigment by comparison 
with a standard. In pure haemolytic jaundice only the 
“ indirect ” reaction is obtained. In other forms of visible 
jaundice due to disease within the liver or fi*om obstruction 
of its ducts the van den Bergh reaction is “ direct ” and some- 
times “ biphasic.” These latter reactions are probably due 
to the change in the character of the bilirubin in its paussage 
through the liver cells. It is to be noted that the test gives 
no appreciable help in the diagnosis between obstructive and 
toxic or infective jaundice. 



458 


DISEASES OF LIVER 


Obstructive Hepatic Jaundice. — The causes of biliary 
obstruction may be tabulated as foDows : — 

1. Causes within the duct, gall-stones, parasites (these 
very rarely). 

2. Causes in the wall of the duct, carcinoma of the 
duct, congenital stenosis, trauma (usually post-operative 
cicatrization). 

3. Causes outside the duct, e.j., carcinoma of the pancreas, 
chronic pancreatitis, enlarged glands in the portal fissure. 

Depending on the cause, obstructive jaundice may be 
partial, complete, or intermittent. As soon as the flow is 
impeded, the pressure rises in the bile ducts, and absorption 
of bile into the blood stream results. 

The Signs and Symptoms of Obstructive Jaundice , — About 
twenty -four hours after the onset of obstruction, jaundice 
becomes visible in the conjunctivae and mucous membrane of 
the hard palate ; later, the skin of the face, neck, and body 
becomes stained. In artificial light, slight jaundice is easily 
missed, while, on the other hand, fat in the lower part of the 
sclera and in the conjunctivae may be mistaken for jaundice. 
At first the colour is light yellow, but gradually deepens until 
in chronic cases the whole skin becomes of a dark green or 
greenish-black hue. Bile pigment and bUe salts are present 
early in the blood plasma and in the urine, which becomes 
noticeably dark in colour. Casts and albumen are often 
present. With the exclusion of bile from the intestine, the 
stools bewme gre\ish-white in colour, putty-like and bulky, 
owing to the large amount of fatty acids and undigested fat. 
The absence of bile acids from the intestine so diminishes 
the absorption of fat that the quantity in the stools may 
rise to nearly 80 per cent, instead of the normal 10 per cent. 
The liver is usually enlarged, and the gall-bladder may be 
distended and palpable when the common duct is obstructed 
by malignant dise^. When, however, obstruction is due to 
a gall-stone, the gall-bladder cannot become distended and 
enlarged owing to thickening and fibrosis of its wall. This is 
known as Courvoisier’s law. 

If jaundice persists, xanthomata (cholesterin tophi) may 
appear anywhere, most commonly on the eyelids, hands and 
feet. Telangiectases often develop on the forearms, hands 
face and in the mouth. Operative procedures are dangerous 
owing to the prolonged bleeding time, which results from a 
lowering of the level of plasma prothrombin. This is due to 
vitamin K deficiency which develops from poor absorption 
when bile is excluded from the intestine. Tlus vitamin should 



JAUNDICE 


459 


be given as a pre-operative measure to patients with jaundice. 
Unlike acholuric jaimdice, the red cells have an increased 
resistance to h5rpotonic saline. In the absence of a complicat- 
ing infection, leucocytosis is usually absent. The blood 
cholesterol is increased, and the van den Bergh test gives a 
direct positive reaction. The pulse is usually said to be slow 
but this is by no means always true. 

Few symptoms are oaused by jaundice itself. The pruritus, 
sometimes extremely severe, may be pre-icteric, and is perhaps 
due to bile salts. Xanthopsia or yellow vision, which is very 
rare, is not dependent on the degree of jaundice, but is probably 
a toxic effect on the retina. Irritability, mental dullness and 
depression are common. Progressive hver insufficiency leads 
to serious nervous symptoms, such as delirium and convulsions, 
or a typhoid state with dry tongue, hiccough, tachycardia, 
epistaxis, haematemesis and slight fever. This stupor increases 
to coma and finally death. Such a condition is termed 
cholcemia, indicating the failure, collectively, of the functions 
of the liver. 

Toxic or Infective Jaundice. — Jaundice is occasionally seen 
as a complication in severe infective conditions such as pyaemia, 
pneumonia, typhoid or typhud. It also occurs as a result 
of certain poisons, such as arseniuretted hydrogen, arsenic, 
chloroform, T.N.T. and phosphorus. It is also the most 
prominent feature in catarrhal jaundice and acute hepatic 
necrosis. In all the conditions mentioned above there is no 
evidence of biliary obstruction, and the jaimdice is the result 
of damage to the liver cells resulting from infection or 
intoxication. There is great variation in the degree of hepatic 
damage, which may range from the acute necrosis of the liver 
cells seen in aeute yellow atrophy to a mild and transient 
disturbance of function in catarrhal jaundice. There are 
occasional cases in which this toxic or infective hepatitis becomes 
subacute and then chronic with much compensatory hypertrophy 
and varying degrees of irregular fibrosis. In this ‘‘ chronic 
hepatitis ” the jaundice may, for long periods, be latent and 
the process, though slowly progressive, is characteristically 
marked by remissions and exacerbations of the acute or sub- 
acute phase. 

Phosphorus Poisoning, — In this condition the liver is 
enlarged and friable owing to marked fatty change. Severe 
gastro-intestinal symptoms are present, and death usually 
occurs rapidly, with ohohamio symptoms. 

Chloroform Poisoning . — ^This is apt to occur two or three 
days after chloroform aafiesthesia, most commonly in children. 



460 DISEASES OF LIVER 

It is usually fatal, with symptoms similar to those of acute 
hepatic necrosis. 

The Diagnosis between Obstructive and Toxic or Infective 
Hepatic Jaundice. — ^This problem may be difficult, since the 
prolonged absence of bile pigment from the stools is quite 
consistent with a hepatic jaundice. The exact sequenoe of 
events from the onset of any ill-health is important. In hepatic 
jaundice, symptoms of liver disease (anorexia, malaise, lassitude, 
etc.) precede the clay-coloured stools, w’hereas in obstructive 
jaundice the onset may be uneventful, as in most cases of 
carcinoma of the head of the pancreas or marked by biliary 
colic in the case of common duct stone. In obstructive jaundice 
any symptoms characteristic of liver disease will necessarily 
be later than those of obstructed ducts. Enlargement of the 
spleen strongly favours a hepatic jaundice, as it is seldom 
found in common bile duct obstruction except in prolonged 
cholangitis. 

In addition, in obstructive jaundice the galactose test is 
usually normal even in a late stage of the disease, while the 
retention of phosphatase in the blood is much increased. In 
hepatic jaundice these findings are reversed. 

Hsemolytic Jaundice. — ^This is the term applied to any 
jaundice dependent upon the excessive destruction of red blood 
cells with the liberation of haemoglobin and its transformation 
into bilirubin by the cells of the reticulo-endothelial system. 
This change takes place independently of the liver, and the 
hepatic cells are able to excrete the excess bilirubin brought to 
them up to a certain point, but beyond this are unable to do 
so, and jaundice results. The jaimdice occurring in acholuric 
jaundice is of this type {vide p. 349). 


CATAKRHAii JAUNDICE {Acuie Of Infective Hepaiitia) 

2!tiology and Pathology. — Catarrhal jaundice is extremely 
common, especially during adolescence and up to early middle 
life. Sometimes it occurs in small or localised epidemics. 
This affection is due to a widespread mild inflammatory process 
of the hepatic cells which disturbs their functions, especially 
in regard to the excretion of bile. A virus is probably the 
causal agent and one attack confers immunity. The liver is 
often enlarged during the course of the disease and the spleen 
may be palpable. The van den Bergh test gives a direct and 
sometimes a biphasic reaction. 

Sjnnptomi. — Mild gastric disturbanoe may initiate the 



CATARRHAL JAUNDICE 461 

attack, with loss of appetite, nausea, a feeling of fullness in 
the epigastrium, and vomiting. These symptoms, with slight 
fever (100° to 101°) and general lassitude, may precede the 
jaundice by some days. On the other hand, there may be no 
gastric symptoms, and the patient’s attention may be drawn 
to the disorder by the gradual appearance of jaundice, which 
is sometimes first noticed by others. Itching of the skin may 
precede or accompany the jaundice, and can be distressingly 
severe. The urine shows bile pigment and bile salts early, 
and the stools become clay -coloured. The other symptoms 
usually abate with the appearance of jaundice. The liver 
is sometimes enlarged, and slight tenderness under the right 
costal margin may be present. Some colour may return to the 
stools, and the jaundice begin to fade in a week, but a duration 
of three to four weeks, or even longer, is more common. Mental 
depression and drowsiness may be present, and the pulse is 
often slow. The return of bile pigment to the stools is the first 
sign of recovery. Urobilinuria is present when the stools again 
contain bile pigment, disappearing gradually as the liver cells 
recover. 

Diagnosis and Prognosis. — Catarrhal jaundice accounts for 
the great majority of cases of jaundice occurring before the age 
of forty. In epidemics the disease may be suspected before 
the jaundice appears, especially as the onset may be unusually 
severe, with chills and vomiting. Liver damage from anti- 
syphilitic treatment with arsenical preparations may at first 
resemble catarrhal jaundice. In old people the persistence of 
clay-coloured stools beyond six weeks, especially without 
abdominal pain, should arouse suspicion of graver conditions, 
such as carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Obstruction 
by gall-stones in the common bile duct may also be a possibility, 
even without biliary colic. Attacks of fever and intermittent 
biliary obstruction, as shown by the occasional presence of 
bile in the stools, point to stone in the common duct. The 
jaundice in obstruction due to malignant disease may deepen 
to a green tint, but in catarrhal jaundice it remains bright 
yellow. Mild cases of spirocheetosis ictero-hsemorrhagica may 
be clinically indistinguishable from catarrhal jaundice. 

Treatment. — ^The patient should be put to bed. If nausea 
and vomiting are present it is best to give nothing by mouth 
except water, or fluids such as orange juice, lemonade, or 
soda water. It is essential that the diet should be high in 
carbohydrate and as low in fat as possible. Biliary antiseptics 
such as salicylates and hexamine are of questionable value. 
The bowels should be opened daily by a morning saline. 



462 


DISEASES OP LIVER 


Acute Necrosis of the Liver 
(ActUe Yellow Atrophy) 

iEtiology. — In most cases of acute hepatic necrosis there is 
no obvious cause for the disease. Poisons such as trinitro- 
toluene, chloroform, or arsenic may sometimes produce 
degeneration and necrosis of the liver cells, but perhaps the 
most frequent associated factor is pregnancy. It is in 
consequence of the latter fact that the disease is more common 
in females than in males. Other very rare causes are acute 
infections, such as typhoid and influenza, excessive alco- 
holism, and ingestion of poisonous mushrooms ( Amanita 
phalloides). 

Pathology. — There is an acute necrosis of the liver cells 
with autolysis. The liver is shrunken and flabby, with a 
wrinkled capsule. In colour it is yellowish-green, and may 
appear mottled from subcapsular haemorrhages. On section 
the liver pulp is soft, and shows yellow and red areas ; the 
latter consist of completely necrosed cells, while in the yellow 
areas the structure of the liver is to some extent preserved. 
The cells are seen to be in all stages of necrosis, and in parts 
the section may be unrecognisable as liver. If the process has 
been subacute, nodules of hyperplasia are seen, beginning in 
the cells at the periphery of the lobules. A little bile may be 
found in the gall-bladder, but the bile ducts mostly contain 
clear mucus only. The spleen is somewhat enlarged and soft, 
and the renal epithelium shows degenerative changes. 

Symptoms. — The disease usually consists of two fairly well 
defined stages, the first of which lasts five to six days, but may 
be as long as three weeks ; the onset is insidious, with malaise, 
slight fever, jaundice, and vomiting. The second or “ typhoid ” 
stage is marked by severe nervous symptoms closely resembling 
meningitis. Headache, irritability, delirium, muscular twitch- 
ing, and convulsions occur, sometimes with temporary peuralysis 
and squint. The jaundice increases, vomiting becomes violent, 
and there may be blood in the vomit. The pulse is feeble and 
rapid, the tongue dry and coated, the pupils dilated, and the 
temp)erature is often subnormal, but may rise quickly just 
before death. Subcutaneous and submucous hsBmorrhages are 
common. Though at the onset the liver may be enlarged and 
tender, there is soon a rapid diminution in size, and the hepatic 
dullness may disappear as the organ softens, shrinks, and falls 
back, allowing the intestine to overlie it. Occasionally, severe 
pain occurs when patches of further necrosis take place suddenly* 



AFFECTIONS OF THE BLOOD VESSELS 463 

The spleen sometimes becomes palpable. From the early 
cessation of bile formation the stools become clay-coloured. 
Drowsiness increases to stupor and coma, until death occurs. 
This may take place at any time from two to seven days after 
grave symptoms develop. The urine is diminished in amount 
and contains bile pigment, albumen, and casts. Leucin and 
tyroein crystals may occasionally also be found. The van den 
Bergh test gives an immediate direct reaction. 

Diagnosis. — Jaundice, severe gastro-intestinal and nervous 
symptoms, and diminution of the size of the liver make the 
diagnosis clear. The predominance of the liver atrophy 
distinguishes it from other forms of severe toxic jaundice, 
such as phosphorus poisoning. Severe spirochaetal jaimdice 
may be confused with acute yellow atrophy, but in the former 
disease the liver is usually normal in size. 

Prognosis and Treatment. — In acute yellow atrophy the 
outlook is hopeless. Subacute types of the disease may live 
for a considerable period, cund perhaps recover. 

Once severe symptoms have become manifest no treatment 
is of any real avidl. Intravenous glucose and alkalis by 
mouth and rectum should be given. Morphia and venesection 
may give temporary relief. 


Affections of the Blood Vessels of the Liver 

By the layman, gastro-intestinal upsets of all types are 
apt tx) be ascribed to “ chills on the liver.'* In actual fact 
there is little or no evidence that in such conditions the liver 
plays any appreciable part. The sjunpioms attributed to 
a disordered liver, such as anorexia, nausea, constipation, 
headache, or irritability are probably more frequently due to 
a chronic gastritis. 

In congestive cardiac failure, however, chronic venous 
congestion of the liver produces characteristic symptoms and 
signs which need further description. 

Chronic Venou Congestion. — ^This results from the occur- 
rence of congestive cardiac failure (vide p. i>58). The liver 
is much enlarged, and on section shows a characteristic ** nut- 
meg ** appearance, due to the dark congested centres of the 
lobules, surrounded by paler aureas of fatty degeneration. 

Symptoms. — Rapid onset of hepatic congestion, causing 
increase in the size of the liver, produces epigastric pain and 
tenderness from sudden stretching of the capsule. When there 
is tricuspid incompetence the liver may be felt to pulsate, due 



464 DISEASES OP LIVER 

to regurgitation into the hepatic veins. The impulse from the 
direct pulsation of the heart transmitted through the diaphragm 
must be distinguished from true expansile pulsation. This 
is best felt with one hand over the liver in the epigastrium 
and the other at the costal margin in the mid-axillary line. 
There is a feeling of fullness in the epigastrium, loss of appetite, 
often nausea and vomiting. There is an increase in the bile 
pigment in the blood plasma, as shown by van den Bergh’s 
test, and the cunount varies directly with the degree of heart 
failure. Sometimes the patient has obvious icterus, but the 
jaundice may be ** latent.’’ Ascites is common, especially 
when there is oedema of the extremities. 

Treatment is that detailed for cardiac failure {vide p. 504). 

Thrombosis ol the Portal Vein. — This rare condition is 
occasionally met with in cirrhosis of the liver. Malignant 
disease in the neighbourhood or in the Uver may also cause 
thrombosis by infiltration of the vein wall and its lumen. 
Though not often diagnosed, it may be suspected where there 
is a sudden onset of severe portal obstruction with rapid 
increase in ascites and with hsematemesis, melsena, and 
enlargement of the spleen, followed by severe symptoms of 
hepatic msuflSciency. 


Diseases of the Liver 

Sapporative Pylephlebitis. — ^lliiB condition, often termed 
portal pysemia, has become relatively uncommon since the 
importance of early operation in oases of appendicitis has been 
generally recognised. It may follow suppuration with septic 
phlebitis in any part of the area drained by the portal vein, 
most commonly the appendix and the rectum. The septic 
process spreads up the portal vein into the liver, and at autopsy 
there are multiple abscesses in the Uver and sometimes pus in 
the portal vein. 

The symptoms are those of a pymmia with ligors ; often, 
at first, few signs point to involvement of the Uver, but in 
the later stages the patient generaUy becomes slightly jaundiced, 
and the Uver is found to be enlaiged and tender. The leucocyte 
count is high, and effusions, clear or purulent, may occur in 
the right pleural cavity. 

The disease is invariably fatal, and nothing beyond palUative 
treatment is available, but sulphonamide drugs in full doses 
should be tried. 

Abscesses ol the liver. — ^Apart from portal pysexnia, amoebic 



465 


CIRRHOSIS OF THE LIVER 

abscess {vide p. 194) and actinomycosis of the liver {vide p. 91), 
hepatic abscess may ^result from suppuration of a hydatid cyst 
{vide p. 215). Suppurative cholangitis, usually secondary to 
disease of the gall-bladder, may lead to multiple hepatic 
abscesses, and suppuration in the liver is a rare complication 
of trauma, such as bullet wounds, in this region. 


Cirrhosis of the Liver 

{Portal^ AlcoholiCy Lcennec^s Mvltilobvlar Cirrhosis) 

Cirrhosis is chiefly a disease of males in adult life, but it 
is also occasionally seen in women and children. Chronic 
alcoholism is by far the most important, though by no means 
its only cause. Occasionally cirrhosis occurs in total abstainers. 
Possibly it is not so much alcohol itself as the chronic gastritis 
which results from abuse of alcohol which leads to cirrhosis. 
Other substances such as spices, curries, and condiments may 
predisi) 08 e to cirrhosis. 

The disease at the present time is certainly less common 
both in England and in America than was the case twenty 
years ago. This decrease is the result of the greatly increased 
cost of alcohol and a resulting diminution in consumption. 

Pathologry. — The weight of the liver varies considerably 
(900 to 6,000 grm.), depending partly upon the relation between 
the compensatory hyperplasia, the degeneration of cells, the 
increase in fibrous tissue, cmd the amount of fat present. The 
term atrophic cirrhosis is applied when the liver is smaller than 
normal, but as far as the number of actively fimctioning liver 
cells is concerned, there is probably no great difference between 
the very large and the very small. Patients with cirrhosis who 
die of liver insufiicienoy usually have smaller livers than those 
who die from other causes. The surface is irregular, due to 
contraction of fibrous tissue and to proliferation of regenerating 
cells (hobnails). In the larger livers the surface may be merely 
coarsely granular ; in the smaller the whole organ may be 
puckered and deformed ; in both the capsule may be thickened 
and opaque from perihepatitis. On section, the hobnails 
have a yellow or tawny appearance, from which the name 
cirrhosis is derived. The liver substance is divided in a most 
irregul^ manner by greyish-white fibrous tissue which, 
spreading out from the portal areas, encloses a varying 
number of lobules (hence the term “ multilobular **). The 
liver cells are compressed and degenerated. As a result of the 

30 



466 


DISEASES OF LIVER 


portal obstruction produced by the fibrous tissue, collateral 
anastomoses for a compensatory circulation are extensive, and 
are carried out by the following sets of v^els : — 

1. The gastric veins draining into the portal system anasto- 
mose with the OBsophageal veins of the systemic circulation 
around the lower end of the oesophagus. With portal obstruc- 
tion oesophageal varices may be formed, and, if ruptured, 
produce severe haematemesis. 

2. The haemorrhoidal (rectal) plexus forms an anastomosis 
between the superior haemorrhoid^ veins, which drain through 
the inferior mesenteric and splenic veins into the portal system, 
and the middle and inferior haemorrhoidal veins, which drain 
into the inferior vena cava. Varices of the plexus produce 
haemorrhoids, but the latter condition occurs so frequently in 
otherwise normal adults that their presence cannot he regarded 
as suggestive of cirrhosis. 

3. The veins of Retzius connect the intestinal veins with 
the inferior vena cava and its retroperitoneal tributaries. 

4. The para-umbihcal vein running with the round ligament 
of the liver may form an anastomosis between the left bramch 
of the portal vein amd the veins of the abdominal wall. Very 
rarely this produces a bunch of prominent veins at the umbilicus 
known as a CaptU Medusae, 

Symptoms. — ^As long as the collateral circulation and 
compensatory hyperplasia are sufficient there may be no 
symptoms. Thus there are latent cases in which discovery of 
the condition is due to accident or to the occurrence of some 
other disease. It is impossible to determine with any accuracy 
the length of time cirrhosis has been present. 

The onset in cirrhosis is variable. Occasionally patients 
are encountered in whom a sudden, and often severe, hsema- 
temesis is the first sign. Less commonly there is a somewhat 
rapid onset of ascites due to portal obstruction. In most cases, 
however, there is a well-marked history of chronic gastritis which 
extends back for many years, and precedes any symptoms of 
cirrhosis. It must be clearly realised that the morning anorexia 
and vomiting, which are features of nearly all cases of cirrhosis, 
are due not to the liver condition but to a gastritis, usually 
induced by chronic alcoholism. 

When the disease is fully developed the patient presents 
a characteristic picture. The nutrition is poor, with loss of 
subcutaneous fat, so that the face and neck are thin and 
drawn. The eyes are simken, with an icteric tint. The 
complexion is of a dirty sallow hue. There are minute dilated 
vessels over the face and body (spider angiomata) ; the skin 



CIRRHOSIS OF THE LIVER 


467 


is dry, inelastic, and may show pigmentation. The tongue is 
flabby and furred ; the gums are spongy and bleed readily ; 
the breath is offensive, and the lips dry and cracked. A ring of 
minute dilated venules in the lower thoracic region is often seen 
along the attachment of the diaphragm but is, however, not 
uncommon apart from cirrhosis. The abdomen is enlarged by 
the ascites ; the amount of ascitic fluid may be too great to 
allow satisfactory palpation, but with a lesser quantity the liver 
can often be felt by dipping down sharply on it. It is often 
considerably enlarged, diminishing in size os the disease pro- 
gresses, though it may be small from the beginning. On 
withdrawal of fluid, the sharp edge and the hard surface can 
be felt, and its granular or hobnail character can sometimes be 
made out. With marked atrophy, the area of liver duDness 
is decreased. The spleen is easily felt in many cases. 

Slight jaundice is present in a third of the cases, but the van 
den Bergh test will show an increase in the plasma-bilirubin in a 
rather larger percentage. The reaction is direct, either delayed or 
biphasic. SUght irregular fever of 99® to 102® may be present. 

In the earlier stages of cirrhosis the main symptoms are 
those of chronic gastritis. As portal obstruction develops, 
ascites becomes a prominent feature, and in addition there 
may be oedema of the feet. Haematemesis from rupture of 
oesophageal varices may occur, and is occasionally fatal. 
Later still, symptoms of hepatic insufiSciency develop, and the 
patient may die of exhaustion and toxaemia. 

Complications. — A very sudden onset of ascites usually indi- 
cates portal thrombosis, but it is a rare occurrence. Sometimes a 
chronic peritonitis aggravates the ascites due to portal obstruction. 
The fluid will then have a specific gravity of over 1-015, and 
polymorphonuclear cells are present. Patients with portal 
cirrhosis are very susceptible to intercurrent infection, and may 
develop pulmonary tuberculosis and sometimes tuberculous 
peritonitis. Primary carcinoma of the liver is a rare complication. 

Differential Diagnosis. — This is discussed on page 471. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis depends mainly on the extent 
of the liver damage present when the patient is first seen. 
When this is considerable, whatever treatment be adopted 
the outlook is poor. If the condition be discovered before the 
advent of ascites, and the patient live a strictly ordered life 
directed towards the avoidance of such substances as are 
prone to cause liver damage, the disease may be arrested. 
Once aacites has occurred, little can be done ; if, however, it 
^ due to a complicating peritonitis, the fluid may disappear. 
Haematemesis, even though recurrent, is seldom fatal. 



468 DISEASES OF LIVER 

Once toxaBinio symptoms appear, death will usually take 
plaoe in a few months. 

Treatment — The majority of patients with oirrhosis are 
alcoholics, and in dealing with them it is important to insist 
on complete and permanent abstention from alcohol. Other 
possible causes of chronic gastritis, such as spiced foods and 
condiments, should also be forbidden, and the patient, especially 
if elderly or middle-aged, should be put on a low diet with a 
relative increase in carbohydrates. The frequent use of salines 
to keep the bowels regular is important. Hflematemesis should 
be treated with morphia, and, if much blood be lost, a blood 
transfusion may be necessary. In the ascitic stage tapping 
will relieve the abdominal discomfort (vide p. 494). 


H.®mochbomatosis (DiaUte Bronze) 

This is a rare form of cirrhosis of the liver associated with 
some disturbance of iron metabolism, occurring chiefly in men 
of middle age. It is characterised by a remarkable darkening 
of the skin, which has a bluish-grey sheen due to the deposi- 
tion of an iron-containing pigment, haemosiderin. Weakness 
is the chief complaint, and there may be attacks of intestinal 
colic and great prostration. There is a haemolytic anaemia of 
moderate degree, enlargement of the liver, and a palpable 
spleen, Hsemosiderin may be found in the urine. The deposi- 
tion of pigment in the organs causes fibrosis. The pancreas 
is commonly affected, and the chronic pancreatitis often 
produces diabetes mellitus, which is difficult to control. This 
latter condition gives the disease its alternative name of 
bronzed diabetes. There may be partial recovery, but usually 
death results from hepatic insufficiency and acidosis. 


Hypkbteophic Biliary Cirrhosis 

The term hypertrophic biliary cirrhosis probably includes 
a number of different pathological conditions, all of which are 
rare. Hanot in 1875 described a number of cases with enlarge- 
ment of the liver and spleen with Jaundice, abdominal pain, 
vomiting and fever, but it is doubtful whether the so-called 
Hanot’s cirrhosis is a clinical entity. It has already been 
mentioned (vide p. 459) that toxic or infective hepatitis may 
become chronic and lead to fibrosis and hjrpertrophy of the 
liver. Chronic infection or obstruction in the bile passages, 



SYPHILIS OP THE LIVER 469 

Buoh as may result from stones or infection in the gall-bladder, 
occasionally produces a secondary biliary cirrhosis. 

The liver is usually very large. Its surface may be relatively 
smooth or areas of regeneration may render it irregular. The 
spleen is also often enlarged and fibrotic. 

Clinically there is a great variation in the symptoms of 
individual cases. Jaundice may be more or less persistent, or 
occur only in attacks, and gastro-intestinal symptoms, such as 
colicky pain, nausea and vomiting are not constantly present. 

When hypertrophic cirrhosis appears to have arisen secon- 
darily to chronic infection of the gall-bladder, cholecystectomy 
may prevent further damage to the hver. In all cases plenty 
of glucose should be given and the fats in the diet kept low. 
Alcohol should be forbidden. Sometimes injections of insulin 
(up to 10 units twice daily) followed by ingestion of glucose 
appear to help to improve liver function. 


Syphilis of the Liver 

In congenital syphilitic infants the hver and spleen are 
often enlarged, and contain great numbers of spirochaetes. 
The liver cells are surroimded and compressed by a fine 
pericellular cirrhosis, and the infant usually dies at or shortly 
after birth. Congenital sj’philis of the liver is also sometimes 
seen during adolescence. The condition then resembles the 
irregular gummatous liver of acquired sj philis. 

In the secondary stage of acquired syphilis there may be 
an acute hepatitis, which results in jaundice, often associated 
with a painless but sometimes persistent hepatic enlargement. 
This must be distinguished from the jaundice which sometimes 
follows the administration of auBenical compounds. 

Tertiary Syphilis. — {Syphilitic Cirrhosis of the Liver ), — 
Gummata are not very uncommon in the liver, and are much 
more frequent in men than in women, appearing ten to tw^enty 
years after infection. 

Pathology , — Remarkable deformities result from the com- 
bination of scf^rring due to healed gummata and the nodules 
produced by more recent lesions. Multiple granulomatous 
areas with necrosis of the central portion are surrounded by 
a fibrous capsule, contraction of which, with absorption of the 
caseous centres, produces extensive puckering of the liver 
surface. Adhesions to neighbouring structures may develop. 
Amyloid degeneration may occur as a complication, and may 
involve also the spleen, kidneys, and intestine. 



470 


DISEASES OF LIVER 


Symptoms and Signs . — ^There are often none, the gununata 
and oioatrioes being discovered post-mortem. General symp- 
toms of wasting, weakness, slight fever, and secondary ansemia 
without leucocytosis, occasionally precede abdominal discomfort 
or pain. With much fibrosis throughout the organ, or adhesions 
or enlarged glands in the portal fissure, there may be portal 
obstruction resulting in ascites ; with gummata near the 
sxu^ace a peri -hepatitis or a syphilitic peritonitis may give 
rise to ascites. Chronic jaundice is rare, but may be associated 
with splenomegaly. Gummata of the liver often produce a 
most irregular enlargement of the organ, which may be easily 
palpable, and may be mistaken for a growth. 

Differential Diagnosis is dealt with elsewhere {vide p. 471). 

Treatment . — Large doses of potassium iodide (100 to 
200 gr. daily) should be given, together with mercury by 
inunction (5 to 10 grm. of Ung-Hydrarg. B.P. daily). Such 
treatment produces a rapid improvement. Arsenical prepara- 
tions are to be avoided in these patients. 


Maugnant Disease of the Liver 

Pathology. — Primary new growths in the liver, whether 
carcinoma or sarcoma, are very rare. The most frequent 
occurrence of primary carcinoma is in association with 
cirrhosis. In this form there are multiple small growths 
throughout the liver substance. The disea-se runs a rapid 
course, with signs of liver insufficiency. 

The liver is more frequently involved by secondary deposits 
of carcinoma than any other organ. These produce some of 
the largest livers found at post-mortem, weighing up to 30 lbs. 
or even more. The primary growth is most commonly of 
the stomach, and next in order of frequency are the colon, 
oesophagus, pancreas, gall-bladder, uterus and breast. 

Symptoms and Signs. — Gradual enlargement with irregularity 
of surface is the chief characteristic of growth in the liver. 
Nodular masses with central depressions or umbilications can 
be felt or even seen through the abdominal wall. The oigan 
may reach below the umbilicus. Sometimes the left lobe is 
more affected than the right, producing a large inniM in the 
epigastric region. The deposits near the surface are apt to 
cause considerable pain and tenderness from peri-hepatitis, 
and friction rubs may be heard. 

Jaundice is present in half the cases, but is seldom intense. 
Ascites occurs with about the same frequency as jaundice, but 



HEPATIC ENLARGEMENT 


471 


both in combination are less common. The ascites may be 
due to the pressure of nodules on the portal vein, but more 
often to extension of the growth to the peritoneum. The 
veins in the abdominal wall are enlarged, and rarely there 
may be nodules of carcinomatous tissue about the navel. The 
patient is markedly cachectic ; the face is cadaverous, and 
there is severe hypochromic ansemia ; weakness and loss of 
flesh are progressive. An irregular fever is frequently present, 
even without suppurative complications. CEdema of the feet 
is common. Widespread involvement of the hver ultimately 
produces death in coma from liver insuflSciency. 

Differential Diagnosis. — See below. 

Treatment. — Morphia should be given freely when necessary, 
and the bowels can be kept regulated by salines and mild 
laxatives. When there is any possibility of doubt as to the 
diagnosis, an exploration is justifiable. 


Differential Diagnosis of Hepatic Enlargement 

Hepatic enlargement is often the most prominent feature 
in pathological conditions of the liver, but before considering 
the differential diagnosis it is important to stress the fact that 
not every palpable liver is enlarged. Weakness of the abdomtoal 
muscles and a general visceroptosis may result in the liver 
being considerably lower in the abdomen than is normally 
the case. In addition to such a ptosis of the organ, a thin 
abdominal wall facilitates palpation, and thus gives a false 
impression of the size of the liver. In such oases careful 
percussion of the upper border of the liver may show that 
the liver dullness does not extend up to its normal position 
in the thorax, i.e., the fifth intercostal space in the right nipple 
line. Too much stress, however, must not be laid on variations 
in the extent of the liver dullness, which is much influenced by 
such factors as emphysema or intestinal distension. 

The causes of enlargement of the liver are tabulated below : 

1. Chronic venous congestion (nutmeg liver). 

2. Abscesses (single or multiple). 

3. The cirrhoses : (a) portal ; (6) gummatous ; (c) 

splenic anaBmia ; {d) bronzed diatetee ; (c) biliary. 

4. Growths, primary or secondary. 

5. Cysts : hydatids. 

6. Lardaceous disease. 

7. Hodgkin’s disease and the leukaemias. 



472 


DISEASES OF LIVER 


In the majority of oases a careful history and general 
physical examination are often sufficient to decide the diagnosis. 

Acute infections of the liver resulting in abscess formation, 
whether single or multiple, are usually relatively easy to 
diagnose. PjTexia of a hectic type, local tenderness over the 
Uver, leucocytosis, and occasionally a rub, all suggest hepatic 
suppuration, which may be secondary to amoebic infections of 
the colon or to an inflammatory focus in the portal area. 

The main diagnostic problems arise in the differentiation 
of hepatic enlargements due to growths, cirrhosis, and hydatid 
disease. Age and sex afford little help, and both with growth 
and cirrhosis emaciation and cachexia are severe . Chronic enlarge - 
ment of the liver with little or no impairment of the general 
health is almost diagnostic of hydatid cyst. This diagnosis may 
be confirmed by an eosinophilia, a positive complement fixation 
test, or more rarely the finding of a h^^datid thrill (vide p. 215). 

In every case of hepatic enlargement, especially after the 
age of forty, careful search must be made for a primary growth 
which sometimes may give little evidence of its presence. 
Careful examination of the prostate, testicles, and breasts is 
important. Primary carcinoma of the liver is so rare that 
consideration of this possibility may for practical purposes be 
neglected. Secondary melanotic s^coma may give rise to 
great hepatic enlargement months or even years after the 
primary growth in the eye or skin has been removed. Melanin 
is found in the urine. Of the cirrhoses, by far the most 
common is portal cirrhosis. A history of chronic alcoholism 
and evidence of chronic gastritis in the form of morning 
anorexia and vomiting will suggest this diagnosis. Newly 
formed spidery angiomata are also often seen in cirrhosis. 

P}Texia is common in the later stages of both growth and 
cirrhosis. Its presence, therefore, in a patient with enlargement 
of the liver does not exclude the possibility of these conditions. 

If, in addition to hepatic enlargement, the spleen is also 
enlarged, the patient is probably suffering from cirrhosis rather 
than growth. If the splenic enlargement is considerable, and 
particularly if it is associated with secondary anaemia or 
hacraatemesis, Banti’s disease is probable. Other types of 
cirrhosis such as Hanot’s and bronzed diabetes are excessively 
rare. In the latter, pigmentation and glycosuria point to the 
correct diagnosis. In Hanot’s cirrhosis the patient is much 
younger than is usually the case in portal cirrhosis, and 
jaundice is a more marked feature. Ascites is common both 
with growth and cirrhosis, and has little diagnostic import. 

Very valuable information is obtained from physical 



CHOLECYSTITIS 473 

examination of the liver. With growth the organ is often very 
much enlarged and hard, but the most characteristic feature is 
the irregularity of the surface, which can be readily noted on 
palpation. The irregularities correspond to projecting nodules 
of new growth, which often attain a size of several inches in 
diameter. The umbilication of the deposits which is apparent 
at autopsy can sometimes be felt during life. In portal cirrhosis 
the liver surface feels hard, but it has not the gross bosses and 
irregularities palpable in growths. If the abdominal wall be 
very thin it may be possible to feel the roughening of the 
surface due to “ hobnails.*' Extreme irregularity of surface 
is encountered in gummatous conditions of the hver ; this is 
likely to be confused with secondary deposits, but a positive 
Wassermann test and a diminution in the size of the liver under 
treatment with iodides help to justify the diagnosis. 

Abnormalities in the shape of the liver may lead to 
errors in diagnosis. A tongue-like projection of the right 
lobe of the liver, often associated with chronic inflammatory 
conditions in the gall-bladder, may protrude downwards, and 
is known as Riedel’s lobe. 

A chronic solitary abscess may produce great enlargement 
of the liver, and is liable to be misdiagnosed as growth. 
Pjnexia, leucoc 3 rto 8 i 8 , and local tenderness may be completely 
absent. In doubtful cases laparotomy is advisable. 

Amyloid disease of the liver may produce some of the 
largest livers encountered at autopsy. The organ is smooth, 
firm, and painless. The disease is usually generalised, and 
also affects the spleen, kidneys, and intestines. It occurs in 
suppuration of long standing, such as results frqm clironic 
osteomyelitis, empyema, and chronic tuberculosis. Aniemia, 
albuminuria, and diarrhoea are common. 


DISEASES OP THE GALL-BLADDER AND 
BILE DUCTS 

Cholecystitis 

Acute Catarrhal Cholecystitis. — Acute cholecystitis occasion- 
ally occius as a complication of enteric fever. Like acute 
appen^citis, however, it usually arises apparently spontaneously 
and without any ascertainable cause. Possibly focal infection, 
such as suppuration around the teeth or in the tonsils, may 
play a part in its production. Ascending infection from the 
duodenum is probably not an important factor. Predisposing 



474 DISEASES OF THE GALL-BLADDER 

causes are : (1) a previous inflammation ; (2) the presence of 
gall-stones ; (3) conditions favouring stasis of bile in the 

gall-bladder. 

On bacteriological examination of the bile the majority of 
cases show a pure culture of BdciUua coli, but it is probable 
that this represents a secondary infection, and that the original 
organism, usually a non-hflemolytic streptococcus, has died 
out. In cholecystitis associated with typhoid fever the typhoid 
organism may persist in the bile for years. 

Pathology , — In early lesions a mild catarrhal inflammation 
is present, with congestion and oedema of the mucosa. Later, 
the mucous membrane is reddened, and becomes thickened 
and covered with mucus and fibrin. With a more intense 
inflammation, usually in the presence of gall-stones, suppuration 
or necrosis of the wall may result in perforation. 

Symptoms . — These vary with the virulence of the infection. 
Severe continuous pain with colicky exacerbations in the right 
upper abdomen is the commonest symptom. There are also 
vomiting and fever, while clinical examination reveals tender- 
ness under the right costal margin, rigidity of the right rectus, 
and lack of movement of the right dome of the diaphragm. 
In the absence of rigidity an enlarged gaU-bladder may some- 
times be palpable. A moderate leucocji/osis is present. 

Acute Suppurative Cholecystitis. — If the conation progress 
to suppuration, symptoms and signs, both local and general, 
become aggravated. Rigidity is increased ; pulse and tem- 
perature rise ; and the patient is obviously toxaemic. A 
leucocyte count will show an increase over that found in the 
catarrhal stage. Perforation results in a localised abscess 
rather than generalised peritonitis. 

Diagnosis . — Differentiation from acute appendicitis may 
be difficult, especially when the appendix lies high in the 
abdomen. Acute pyelitis on the right side should be excluded 
by examination of the urine. Gall-stone colic gives more 
agonising pain and no signs of local peritonitis. 

TreatmerU . — Catarrhal cholecystitis may subside spon- 
taneously. If there be any history suggestive of previous 
attacks or of gall-stones, an exploration should be advised and 
cholecystectomy performed. 

Chronic Cholecystitis. — (Jhronic cholecystitis often follows 
an acute attack, and should gall-stones be formed there is a 
tendency for the acute phase to recur. It is often associated 
with some degree of cholangitis and sometimes with chronic 
appendicitis. The gall-bladder may be adherent to adjacent 
structures. The wall is thicken^, and the whole organ 



CHOLECYSTITIS 


475 


becomes shrunken. The mucous membrane and muscle layer 
may be largely replaced by fibrous tissue, and there are focal 
areas of lymphocytic infiltration. The remnants of the mucous 
membrane are thrown up in relief and become distorted into 
adenoma-like masses. In addition, gaU-stones are often 
present. 

Symptoms and Signs . — ^The digestive symptoms are char- 
acteristically variable and irregular, often with long intervals 
of freedom. In some cases they resemble those of gastric or 
duodenal ulcer, especially the latter. The most constant 
symptoms are feelings of fullness, flatulence, and, less commonly, 
pain coming on immediately or several hours after food or 
occurring at night. Nausea, especially following a fatty meal, 
is frequent. There may be pain simulating biliary colic, and, 
indeed, it is often impossible to say whether stones are present. 
The pain is usually in the neighbourhood of the right costal 
margin, but sometimes it may be located in the midline of the 
epigastrium ; it is often propagated to the side and back and 
into the right scapular or shoulder region. 

Tenderness over the gall-bladder under the eighth and ninth 
costal cartilages is the most constant sign. It is best elicited 
by getting the patient to take a deep breath while the region of 
the gall-bladder is being palpated. When the inflamed organ 
comes into contact with the hand of the examiner there is a 
spasm of pain and a catch in the breath (Murphy's sign). This, 
however, is not necessarily always foimd, though usually^ present 
dming or shortly after an exacerbation. 

Test-meal examinations show no chEuracteristic features. 
Occasionally small amounts of occult blood are found in the 
faeces, especially when stones are present. 

Treatment . — If there be no serious adhesions, some improve- 
ment may be expected with medical treatment. Foci of 
infection should be eradicated. A diet poor in cholesterol is 
advisable as an aid in the prevention of calculi. Such foods 
as eggs, kidneys, liver, pancreas, brains, animal fats, cream, 
butter, and fried fish ought not to be taken. 

If symptoms persist in spite of medical treatment, stones 
or adhesions are usually present, and cholecystectomy should 
be performed. It must be realised that even at laparotomy 
diagnosis of a pathological gall-bladder is not always easy. If 
the abdomen^ has been opened for suspected disease of the 
gall-bladder, the organ shordd always be excised, whether 
macroBcopically it appears grossly abnormal or not, unless 
there be some other obvious condition in the abdomen to 
explain the symptoms. 



476 


DISEASES OF THE GALL-BLADDER 


Gall-stokbs {Chcldiihiaaia) 

iEtiolofiry- — Gall-stones may occur at any age, but the main 
incidence of s)unptoms is upon women of forty and over, who 
have borne children. The production of gall-stones depends 
on the presence of several factors. 

1. Infection , — Inflammation prevents satisfactory emptying 
of the g^l-bladder, with resulting stasis of bile. La addition, 
the inflamm atory exudate contains mucus, bacteria, degenerated 
epithelium and leucocytes, which may act as nuclei for the 
formation of stones. A lessened bile-salt concentration may 
also aid in this precipitation. Various organisms are responsible 
for the initial infection. Typhoid bacilli have occasionally 
been cultured from the centre of calculi. The streptococcus is 
probably an important agent. Bacillus coli is more often 
discovered than any other organism, but is probably a 
secondary invader. 

2. Blood Cholesterol , — This is derived from endogenous and 
exogenous sources. The former include the cortex of the 
adrenals and the corpora lutea during menstruation. During 
pregnancy there is an increase in the blood cholesterol, and 
often gall-stone symptoms first make their appearance at this 
time. The exogenous sources are articles of diet such as 
sweetbreads, liver, kidney, brains, crectm, butter, and eggs. 

3. Biliary Stasis , — Sedentary occupations and obesity 
hinder complete emptying of the gall-bladder, and so add to 
the risk of infection. 

Composition of Oall-Stones. — The commonest form are 
those composed of cholesterol and bilirubin-calcium. They are 
usually multiple, dark broi^mish-green in colour, stratified, and 
often faceted unless enormous numbers be present, when they 
are usually round. Single stones are either pure cholesterol 
and not caused primarily by infections, or are composed mainly 
of cholesterol with a small amount of bilirubin-calcium as an 
outside layer. Pure pigment stones occur in acholuric jaundice. 

Symptoms and Signs* — Although it is true that gall-stones 
are found at autopsy in patients who have died of other 
conditions, it is doubtful whether the presence of stones is 
often unaccompanied by symptoms. These fall into two main 
types: (1) gall-bladder dyspepsia; (2) biliary ooUo. The 
former has already been d^cribed in connection with chronic 
cholecystitis {vide p. 474), 

Biliary Colic.-^psmm of the smooth muscle in the wall of 
the cystic and common ducts, due to the presence or passage 



GALL-STONES 477 

of calouli, causes intense pain. These attacks of colic may 
occur at any time, sometimes following exercise or jolting. 
The pain may be moderately severe or extraordinarily violent, 
and the attacks last from a few moments to many hours. 
The sudden onset and an equally sudden cessation are most 
characteristic. The pain starts in the right hypochondrium, 
but may be felt first in the epigastrium. It radiates towards 
the axilla and up into the right shoulder. The passage of a 
calculus through the cystic duct is usually slow, and causes 
one of the most extreme types of suffering. Sometimes, 
however, attacks of biliary colic may be much less severe. 
There may be shivering without fever, or the temperature may 
reach 103°. There is great restlessness, and the pain may be 
so agonising as to cause the patient to roll about. Vomiting, 
profuse sweating and shock may be severe. 

Following an acute attack considerable soreness is felt in 
the gall-bladder region, which may last for some days, and 
there may be jaundice of varying duration and severity. 

Effect of Calculus in the Cystic Duct. — Bihary colic due to 
a stone in the cystic duct do^ not produce jaundice. Should 
the walls of the gall-bladder not be fibrosed the organ may 
become greatly distended by mucus. After a time the bile 
pigment is absorbed, clear mucoid material remaining 
(mucocele). The enlarged gall-bladder forms a rounded 
tumour, palpable below the liver, sometimes extending below 
the umbilicus. It may be mistaken for a large kidney or an 
ovarian cyst. Under these conditions an acute cholecystitis 
may complicate the picture, and empyema of the gall-bladder 
is a common sequel. Ulceration of the wall and perforation 
may rarely occur. 

Effect of Calculus in the Common Duct. — Single or multiple 
stones may be present. The usual site is the lower end, in the 
^puUa of Vater (ampulla of the bile duct), where the diameter 
is least, but there may be stones throughout the common and 
hepatic ducts. The obstruction to the duct ma}* be (a) complete ; 
or (6) partial or intermittent. 

(а) Complete Obstruction . — The ducts may become much 
dilat^. The gall-bladder is usually not enlarged owing to a 
coexistent fibrosis due to cholecystitis. Jaimdioe is ^ways 
present and is deep in hue. There is, as a rule, no fever. 

(б) Partial or Intermittent Obstruction . — This is the usual 
effect of stones in the common duct. A calculus in the ampulla 
of Vater has a ball-valve action. The common duct may be 
BO much dilated as to be almost cystic, and the dilatation 
continues into the hepatic and intra-hepatic ducts. The liver 



478 DISEASES OF THE GALL-BLADDER 

enlarges, but may decrease in size later, due to a secondary 
biliary cirrhosis (vide p. 468). 

There is no enlargement of the gall-bladder, which is 
thickened by chronic inflammation. Characteristic symptoms 
are attacks of chills and fever, nausea and vomiting, sometimes 
severe colic, marked jaundice and lessened bile in the stools. 
These parosy^sms (intermittent hepatic fever of Charcot) are 
due to infection of the ducts, and to some extent of the liver, 
when the obstruction becomes temporarily more complete. 
The chills are severe, and the fever may reach 105°. The van 
den Bergh test shows an immediate direct reaction, and there 
is a leucocytosis. These attacks may recur over a number 
of years. If suppuration take place in the ducts, the fever 
becomes remittent ; the jaundice is not so marked, but the 
liver increases in size and may be tender from suppuration. 
Suppurative cholangitis is a fatal complication. 

Complications of Gall-stones. — ^Acute, subacute, and chronic 
cholecystitis are accompaniments of gall-stones and can hardly 
be designated as true complications. A gall-stone in the 
ampulla of Vater may cause bile to flow up the duct of Wirsung 
(the pancreatic duct), and set up acute haemorrhagic pai^creatitis. 
As a result of pericholecystitis, the gall-bladder may become 
adherent to neighbouring structures and inflammatory change 
spreeui to them, with the possibility of the formation of abscesses 
or fistulae. In the abdominal cavity fistulas may form between 
the gall-bladder and the duodenum or colon. If a stone pass 
through a fistula into the lumen of the intestine it may be 
passed in the faeces, or, if large, it may produce aujute obstruction 
(gall-stone ileus) ; this impaction most commonly occurs in 
the lower patrt of the ileum. 

Diagnosis of Biliary CoUc. — The diagnosis is made by the 
tj^ical position and character of the pain, and the presence of 
jaundice or the history of its appearance in some former attack. 
Renal colic is usually felt first in the loin, or lower down in 
the abdomen, radiating to the bladder and genitalia, and the 
urine may contain blood cells. The dyspepsia associated with 
gall-stones sometimes simulates a duodenal ulcer very closely. 
Adhesions of the gall-bladder to the duodenum may produce 
X-ray appearances very suggestive of duodenal ulcer. The 
failure of duodenal symptoms to react to strict medical treat- 
ment is always suspicious, and not infrequently in such cases 
the gall-bladder ultimately proves to be diseased. The gastric 
crises of tabes may imitate gall-stone colic very closely, and 
the pupils and reflexes should be examined. The discovery 
of stones in the feeces makes the diagnosis certain, but masses 



AIDS TO DIAGNOSIS OP GALL-BLADDER 479 

of soaps from the therapeutio use of olive oil are often mistaken 
for gall-stones by patients. 

Treatment. — \^en the presence of gaU-stones is certain, 
whether they be in the gaU-bladder or bile ducts, operation 
is advisable, provided there be no contraindications in the 
general condition of the patient. With palliative treatment 
further trouble is very firequent and operation may have to 
be undertaken at a later date, possibly under less favourable 
circumstances. The operation of choice is cholecystectomy. 

The reduction of obesity, the taking of moderate exercise, 
the strengthening of the abdominal muscles in visceroptotic 
patients, more frequent and smaller meals, with food of low 
cholesterol content, and the administration of cholagogues 
such as magnesium sulphate, salicylates, and bile salts are all 
advisable when operation cannot be performed. Hexamine 
and salicylates may be given as biliary antiseptics. For biliary 
coUc, morphine and atropine are required. 


Aids to the Diagnosis of Gall-bladder Disease 

Radiograms of the gall-bladder region may show the 
shadows of stones, provided they are not pure cholesterol. 
A barium meal may show distortion and filling defects of 
the pyloric end of the stomach or of the duodenum if there 
are adhesions from the gall-bladder. 

Cholecystography. — ^This method of visualising the contents 
of the gall-bladder was introduced by E. W. Graham. It 
depends on the fact that bile is concentrated in the gall-bladder 
by the absorption of water through the mucous membrane. 
Certain dye substances, such as tetra-iodophenolphthalein or 
the isomeric compound phenol-tetra-iodophthalein are excreted 
by the liver, and when sufficiently concentrated in the gall- 
bladder render that organ opaque to X-rays. No concentration 
of bile takes place in the bile ducts, so that shadows corre- 
sponding to them are not seen. * 

Good results are obtained when the dye is given by mouth 
in the form of opacol, shadocol or pheniodol. The drug dissolved 
in water is given at 7 p.m. with a meal consisting of carbo- 
hydrate but no fat. No more food is taken, and after 
fourteen hours using opacol or shadocol and sixteen hours 
using pheniodol, X-ray films are taken of the gall-bladder 
region. The patient then has a fatty meal, such as eggs and 
bacon, and two hours later a further X-ray film is taken. 
The normal gall-bladder is well visualised fourteen hours 



480 DISEASES OF THE GALL BLADDER 

after the dye has been taken, but the later film taken 
after the fatty meal usually shows the shadow to be definitely 
smaller or even absent owing to the gall-bladder having 
emptied. 

Alterations of the OaU-bladder Shadow in Disease, — ( 1 ) 
There may be no shadow ; (2) the shadow may be faint ; (3) 
filling defects may be present ; (4) the shape may be distorted ; 
(5) the density may vary, or the time of appearance and 
disappearance of the shadow may be altered. 

IrUerpretation , — Should the hepatic or cystic duct be 
occluded or the gall-bladder filled by stones, no shadow will 
be visible. Fewer gall-stones may give the shadow a mottled 
appearance. When the gall-bladder fails to concentrate the 
bile the shadow will be faint or absent. Adhesions or pressure 
from without will distort the outUne. 

Disadvantages , — The presence of hepatic disease contra^ 
indicates the use of dyes, owing to the danger of further injury. 
This includes cases with marked jaundice. Nausea, vomiting, 
and diarrhoea may occur, but if plenty of carbohydrate and 
water be taken with the drug, these are not common. 


Cabcinoma of the Bile Passages 

Etiology . — Carcinoma may arise in any portion of the 
ducts or gall-bladder but the gall-bladder is much the most 
common site. Its greater incidence in women is in keeping 
with their greater susceptibility to gall-stones. Gall-stones are 
a common antecedent, and are present in 70 to 90 per cent, 
of gall-bladder carcinomata. 

Pathology , — The fundus of the gall-blaclder is the usual 
site, but carcinoma may start anywhere, and if in proximity 
to the neck will obstruct the cystic duct. There may be a 
papillomatous outgrowth into the cavity of the bladder or a 
firm white infiltration of the wall. It is either columnar or 
spheroidal celled. Carcinoma of the bile ducts occurs most 
frequently in the lower end of the common bile duct or in the 
ampulla of Vater (ampulla of bile duct). The growi^h is columnar 
celled. Secondary growths may be found in the neighbouring 
lymph glands or liver. 

Symptoms. — Where carcinoma follows cholelithiasis there are 
preening symptoms of gall-stones or chol 6 C 3 r 8 titis. The onset 
of malignancy may be accompanied by persistent pain in the 
right hj^chondrium, with flatulence and loss erf appetite. 
The patients lose weight rapidly. A hard irregular tumour 




Pjlatk 

< \ iHiiulitMHl !>y ‘ hoI*'o\«*U»grai»liy.8ho\viiig-tone*. Some 

*>f t hi' <l\ iMH itl»o viaihl** III coliJii. ( From X -ray by I>rP, J. Brig^.) 



Diseases op the pancreas 48i 

often appears below the costal margin, directed towards the 
umbilicus, and may reach large proportions. Tenderness is 
only moderate, and rigidity of the right rectus not nearly as 
marked as in inflammatory conditions. The liver may become 
involved from direct extension or metastatic growths. 

In carcinoma of the common duct or ampulla of Vater, 
there is a progressive obstructive jaundice {vide p. 458). The 
stools are sicholic ; the amount of pain is very variable ; colic 
occurs, but there may be no freedom from pain in the intervals. 
The gall-bladder becomes enlarged, and the liver is increased 
in size. The primary growth is not palpable, but some deep 
tenderness is present without marked rigidity. There is 
wasting and cachexia, and occasional slight fever. Ascites may 
ensue from peritonitis or pressure of enlarged glands in the 
portal fissure. Death results in a few months. 

Diagnosis , — Carcinoma of the gall-bladder is recognised, 
when extensive, by the hard irregular tumour, with marked 
loss of weight occurring in an elderly patient with a history 
of gall-stones. In empyema of the gall-bladder, fever and 
leucocytosis are points of distinction. 

The diagnosis of carcinoma of the common duct is more 
diiSBcult. An important point of differentiation from gall-stone 
obstruction is the distension of the gall-bladder in the case of 
growth. Wasting and the absence of chills and fever are 
features of malignant stricture. Carcinoma of the head of the 
pancreas is usually painless throughout the course of the illness. 

Treatment , — Symptomatic treatment is all that is possible, 
operative procedures being out of the question by the time 
diagnosis is possible. In cancer of the common duct or ampulla, 
a cholecyst-duodenostomy may be done to relieve the 
obstructive jaundice. 


diseases of the pancreas 

Physiology. — The gland has two functions, the manufacture 
of insulin, which is produced by the cells of the islands of 
Langerhans, and the production, by the cells of the acini, of 
the digestive ferments, lipase, trypsin, and diastase, which are 
excret^ into the duodenum by way of the ducts of Wirsui^ 
(the pancreatic duct) and Santorini (the accessory pancreatic 
duct). The former joins the common bile duct to form the 
ampulla of Vater, The duct of Santorini is small and has 
a separate opening into the duodenum. The pancreatic 
secretion provides for the digestion of fats, proteins, and 
31 



482 DISEASES OP THE PANCREAS 

carbohydrates, and ajiy diminution in the secretion is reflected 
in the character of the stools, though the disturbance must be 
considerable before this is evident. 

Deficient pancreatic secretion renders the faeces bulky, pale, 
and oily, owing to an increase in their fat-content. This 
condition is described as steatorrhoea. If, also, there be an 
interference with the passage of bile into the intestine, 
absorption of fats is still further hindered. On microscopic 
examination neutral fats and fatty acids are seen as droplets 
or needles, and there is also an increase in the niunber of 
undigested striated muscle fibres, a condition known as 
azotorrhoea. The fatty acids give the fasces a foul odour. 

Diarrhoea is a constant accompaniment of achylia pan- 
creatica, and may be very severe. There is no blood, but 
mucus may be present. 

Laboratory methods for the detection of pancreatic 
insufficiency are not altogether satisfactory. Samples of the 
duodenal contents may be examined qualitatively for the 
presence of the pancreatic ferments, but quantitative estima- 
tions are difficult. The determination of the fat content of 
the faeces is also unsatisfactory. Perhaps the best test of 
pancreatic efficiency is the diastase index. This is based upon 
the fact that with obstruction of the pancreatic ducts di;istase 
is absorbed into the blood and excreted in the urine. The 
latter normally contains 10 to 30 units of diasttise, but with 
disease of the pancreas this figure may rise to 200 imits. 


Acute Panckeatitis 

iBtiology. — Previous or concomitant disease of the gall- 
bladder with stones occurs in rather less than 50 ix?r cent, of 
cases. In all, the process is essentially that of the activation 
of tiyq)sinogen into trypsin, resulting in self-digestion of the 
pancreas. The agent producing this transformation is infected 
bile ; normal bile or bacteria alone are not so active in this 
regard. Intestinal juice containing entcrokinaso will also 
produce widespread necrosis. It is possible that a duodenitis 
may be a preceding factor in some cases, especially in alcoholic 
individuals. Trauma with haemorrhage may also be followed 
by acute pancreatitis. 

Pathology. — Foreign substances ascending the jmncreatic 
ducts will injure the pancreatic cells, and the chemical change 
activates the ferments, with the production of autolysis. The 
gland is swollen, reddened, and friable. Necrosis, gangrene, or 



CHRONIC PANCREATITIS 


483 


suppuration may be seen in varying degrees ; the activation 
of lipase produces fat necrosis, which is seen as opaque white 
areas in the neighbouring tissues, especially in the fat about 
the pancreas and in the omentum. The lesser peritoneal sac 
may contain sero-ha^morrhagic fluid. 

Symptoms. — ^The typical attack is extremely severe. The 
onset is sudden, with intense pain in the epigastrium, often 
radiating to the left and going through to the back. It is 
usually a constant vice-like pain, but paroxysms of increased 
severity may occur. Vomiting begins soon after the pain and 
is persistent. The abdomen becomes distended and the con- 
dition may be mistaken for intestinal obstruction or acute 
peritonitis. The whole epigastrium is tender, but not markedly 
rigid. Deep palpation is possible, and occasionally a feeling of 
resistance is made out across the epigastrium, or the swollen 
head of the pancreas can be felt. The patient is obviously 
very severely iU from the onset ; the skin is pale and moist, 
the temperature subnormal, and the pulse rapid. Sudden loss 
of consciousness may even occur from shock. Glycosuria is 
uncommon, but the diastase index is high. A small quantity 
of blood-stained fluid may be foimd in the peritoneal cavity at 
operation. Death usually occurs on the third or fourth day. 

Diagnosis. — The severe pain, persistent vomiting, and 
general condition of shock associated with acute pancreatitis 
can rarely bo distinguished with certainty from other 
conditions, such as perforation of a viscus or intestinal 
obstruction. Though acute pancreatitis may be suspected, 
the diagnosis is often uncertain until the abdomen is opened. 
Points which suggest the condition are acute tenderness in the 
epigastrium, with little or no rigidity. Fortunately, exact 
diagnosis is not essential, as the condition is one wMch calls 
for immediate operation and surgical drainage. 

Suppurative Pancreatitis , — ^Abscesses in the pancreas may 
occur in suppurative pylephlebitis, or as a sequel of a subacute 
haemorrhagic pancreatitis. 


Chbonio Pancreatitis 

iEtiology and Pathology. — Chronic fibrosis of the pancreas 
of a mild degree may be found during the course of routine 
post-mortem examination. Reports by surgeons that a chronic 
pancreatitis is present are often open to question, because 
palpation is difficult, and the size, shape, and consistency of 
the normal gland is subject to wide variations. 



484 DISEASES OP THE PANCREAS 

The commonest form of chronic pancreatitis is that char- 
acterised by an increase in the fibrous tissue between the 
lobules, and it is often associated with disease of the gall- 
bladder. Infections of the duodenum, either as a simple 
duodenitis or associated with an ulcer, may produce a similar 
condition. In spite of extreme fibrosis and atrophy of the 
gland, the islands of Langerhans remain imaffected. Another 
type of inflammatory change is an interacinar fibrosis with 
atrophy. This form is seen in some cases of diabetes and in 
the rare disease haemochromatosis, in which deposition of iron- 
containing pigment produces an interacinar fibrosis. 

Symptoms. — It is difficult to recognise cases of chronic 
interlobular pancreatitis, as the sjmptoms and signs are 
indefinite, but the enlarged head of the gland may sometimes 
be felt. Discovery of the condition is usually made during 
operations for gall-stones or at post-mortem. For these reasons 
little description of the clinical picture can be given. 

Pancreatic pain is felt deep in the epigastrium, towards the 
left side and in the back at the same level. The absence of 
pancreatic ferments in the intestine leads to steatorrhoea and 
azotorrhoea, and the loss of fat produces marked wasting. 
Glycosuria is rare in interlobular pancreatitis. Jaundice may 
occur from the pressure of the fibrotic head of the pancreas 
on the common duct, but is usually due to coincident 
gall-stones. 

Diagnosis. — The majority of cases in which chronic pan- 
creatitis is likely to be suspected are those either of carcinoma 
of the head of the pancreas or of biliary tract disease. Practical 
experience shows that a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis is 
frequently proved wrong by subsequent developments. 

Treatment — Chronic cholecystitis and gall stones require 
cholecystectomy. Obstruction to the common bile duct by 
fibrosis of the head of the pancreas may be relieved by 
cholecystenterostomy. The diet must be low in fats, but 
carbohydrates are better tolerated. Pancreatin, with 20 gr. 
of calcium carbonate, should be given two hours after each 
meal. 


Caboinoma of the Panceeas 

Pathology. — Carcinoma originates in the head of the 
pancreas in slightly over three-quarters of the cases. It begins 
either in the ducts or in the acini, forming a firm, hard mass, 
often infiltrating the gland. Owing to the localisation of the 
tumour in the head of the pancreas, glycosuria is uncommon. 



PANCREATIC CYSTS 


485 


Afl the common bile duct (the bile duct) is always more or less 
embedded in the head of the pancreas, it is usually obstructed 
as well as the pancreatic ducts. 

Symptoms and Signs. — ^Digestive disturbances such as 
nausea, anorexia, abdominal discomfort, and vomiting are 
common. Pain, however, is not a feature of the disease, and 
in most cases is completely absent. When it occurs it is deeply 
seated in the epigastrium, and extends into the back. 

Jaundice, progressing steadily to a deep olive-green or 
black appearance, is the most prominent symptom. Itching 
of the skin is often intense. The liver is usually not enlarged, 
but the gall-bladder is distended, though not necessarily 
palpable. Throughout the course of the disease no tumour is 
palpable in two-thirds of the cases, and the diagnosis is difficult. 
The stools are clay-coloured and fatty from the absence of 
bile, but there is no free fat. Loss of weight and strength is 
rapid, and cachexia soon follows. Death usually takes place 
four to six months from the beginning of symptoms. 

Diagnosis. — Progressive jaundice of obstructive type, usually 
without pain in a patient who is past middle age, is likely to 
be due to carcinoma either of the pancreas or of the common 
bile duct. Jaundice due to obstruction by a gall-stone can 
usually be diflferentiated by a history of biliary colic and the 
non -progressive character of the jaundice. An enlarged and 
palpable gall-bladder associated with jaundice suggests growth 
of the pancreas rather than gall-stone obstruction, owing to 
the fact that in the latter condition the gall-bladder is likely 
to be fibrotic. Catarrhal jaundice seldom occurs during the 
period of life in which carcinoma is common, and the gradual 
disappearance of the jaimdice together with the absence of 
emaciation and cachexia soon differentiate the conditions. 
Chronic pancreatitis associated with jaundice may be very 
confusing. 

Treatment. — The most distressing symiptom is usually the 
intense itching, which may render life intolerable. Fortunately, 
this can always be relieved by choleeystenferostomy. The 
diet should be low in fata. 


Pancreatic Cysts 

iEtiology and Pathology. — ^True pancreatic cysts are rare. 
More common are pseudo-cysts formed by the collection of 
serous fluid in the lesser peritoneal sac by closure of the 
foramen of Winslow (aditus of lesser sac). Such cysts are often 



486 DISEASES OF THE PANCREAS 

very large; they are not lined with epithelium, the walls 
being formed of connective tissue. True pancreatic cysts 
are either retention cysts due to obstruction of a duct or 
cystic adenomata. The tail of the pancreas is the usual 
site. They are lined with epithelium derived from the pan- 
creatic ducts or acini. In true cysts the fluid has a 
shimmering appearance, is reddish-brown in colour, and 
contains degenerated cells, traces of pancreatic diastase, and 
often cholesterol ciy^stals. Multiple small cysts may occur 
in conjunction with congenital polycystic disease of other 
organs, such as the liver and kidney. 

Symptoms and Signs. — The tumour due to the cyst is the 
most important sign. It is felt above the umbilicus in the 
midline or to the left under the costal margin extending to 
the midline. It may api)ear between the stomach and trans- 
verse colon, or between the lesser curvature of the stomach 
and the liver. The dullness on percussion may be continuous 
with that of the liver and spleen. The surface is smooth, 
with a rounded outline. If the tension of the contained fluid 
is not too great, fluctuation can be elicited. The mass may 
be the size of an orange, or may almost fill the abdominal 
cavity. It may or may not move on respiration. 

Pain is a variable feature ; often there is none, but 
occasionally colicky pain is felt in the epigastrium, even 
before a tumour is palpable. There may be radiation of the 
pain to the left. 

Nausea and vomiting may be troublesome and account to 
some extent for the loss of weight and weakness, (llycosuria 
may occur, especially when the tail of the pancreas is involved. 
Symptoms may result from pressure on the common bile duct, 
portal vein, or inferior vena cava. The enlargement Is usually 
gradual, but haemorrhage into the cyst may cause sudden 
increase in size with pain and slight fever. 

Diagnosis. — The occurrence sudden changes in the cyst, 

such as haemorrhage, may lead to its discovery. 

A radiographic examination with a barium meal or enema 
will demonstrate the relation of the cyst to the stomach aind 
colon. Without operation it is impossible to diagnose the type 
of cyst. In the differential diagnosis a distended gall-bladder, 
mesenteric cyst, echinococcus cyst of the liver, hydro-nephrosis, 
and ovaurian cyst must be distinguished. 

Treatment. — The cyst should be drained by operation. The 
patients usually do well, but recurrences are rather frequent. 
Occasional sequelae to drainage are malignant degeneration in 
the wall of the cyst or the formation of calculi. 



PERITONITIS 


487 


Pancreatic Calculi and Adenomata 

Pancreatic stones are exceedingly rare and are seldom 
diagnosed during life. Chronic infection of the pancreatic 
ducts is the probable cause. They are soft, greyish-white 
in colour, and contain calcium. Owing to obstruction of the 
duct, they occasionally give rise to colic, which may be 
mistaken for biliary coUc. They are very opaque to X-rays, 
but calcification within the pancreas may be misleading. 

Treatment is unsatisfactory. 

Adenomata of the cells of the Islets of Langerhans are rare. 
The tumour cells produce excessive quantities of insulin. The 
resulting clinical picture is one of chronic spontaneous 
hypoglycaemia {vide p. 313). 


DISEASES OF THE PERITONEUM 
Peritonitis 

Inflammation of the peritoneum is caused by infection 
with micro-organisms, occurring either primarily or, more 
commonly, secondarily, following morbid processes in the 
contained viscera. The process may be generalised or local. 

iEtiology. — Primary Peritonitis . — This somewhat rare form 
occurs as a terminal complication of gout, nephritis, and of 
any form of septicaemia. Also in this group are streptococcal 
and pneumococcal peritonitis, which, though usually blood 
borne, are often without any obvious focus of origin. 

Secondary Peritonitis . — Inflammation of any of the organs 
within the abdominal cavity may lead to peritonitis ; this, 
however, is most commonly due to perforation of the appendix 
or a peptic ulcer. 

Bacteriology. — Peritonitis is usually a complication of pre- 
existing disease, and may result from any of the infections or 
other morbid conditions to which the abdominal and pelvic 
organs and the adjacent structures are subject. As might be 
expected, the bacteriology of peritonitis is very variable. The 
colon bacillus being a normal inhabitant of the gastro-intestinal 
canal, and having great facility for migrating through the 
injured wall, is, in consequence, ^quently found in peritonitis. 
In the early stages it readily overgrows other organisms, and 
a pure culture is obtained. i.*ater, however, it tends to die out. 
Various strains of streptococci are common. Infections with 
this organism occur sometimes in primary peritonitis and in that 



488 DISEASES OF THE PERITONEUM 

due to puerperal sepsis. The pneumococcus is found as part of a 
mixed infection, but also sometimes as a primary or hsematogenous 
infection. The gonococcus is frequently the cause of a local peri- 
tonitis and, more rarely, of a generalised peritoneal infection. 

Pathology. — In the earliest stage of a general peritonitis 
the peritoneal surface becomes dulled from congestion and 
cedema. A serous and fibrinous exudation takes place and 
free fluid is found in the peritoneal cavity. The fibrinous 
exudate soon causes matting together of the organs, and the 
intestines ultimately become distended. The character of the 
exudate changes as the leucoc3des increase until it may be 
thick and purulent. The particular organism predominating 
may determine the peculiarities of the exudation. In BaciUus 
coli infections the pus is thick, milky, and foul-smelling. In 
virulent streptococcal peritonitis thin brownish fluid is found. 
In pneumococcal infection the pus is greenish and pseudo- 
membranous deposits may be seen. 

In the healing process the exudate is either completely 
absorbed or there is organisation of the injured surfaces, so 
that firm fibrous adhesions are formed. The acute procas-s 
may tend to become localised, especially when originating in 
the gall-bladder, appendix, or pelvic organs. Sudden jwrfora- 
tion of a viscus spreads infection quickly over the whole 
peritoneal surface. 

Acute Perforation of a Viscna. — The majority of ca-ses of 
general peritonitis result from the perforation of a hollow 
viscus and early diagnosis is of vital iinportaiu'o. The trojitinent 
is purely surgical, and the symptoms and signs of i)erforation 
are dealt with in textbooks of surgery. 

Tuberculous Peritonitis. — Vide p. 136. 

Pneumococcal Peritonitis. — This is more frequent in children 
than in adults, and is usually independent of but may rarely 
be a complication of pneumonia. The predominance of this 
form of peritonitis in girls suggests infection by way of the 
genital tract, and a pneumococcal vaginitis has Ijeen shown to 
be present in many instances. A bactericemia at the onset is 
demonstrable in half the ca.se8. A pharyngitis may precede 
the peritoneal symptoms by two or three days. The onset is 
abrupt with high fever. Abdominal pain or vomiting may be 
the first symptom. The vomiting is persistent and may be 
projectile. Diarrhcea is constant at the onset, but later may 
be replaced by constipation. There is abdominal rigidity, 
genenil tenderness, and sometimes tympanites. The fever is 
high, but may show remissions. The leuoocytoeis exceeds 
20,000 and often reaches 40,000. 



PERITONITIS 


481f 

The peritoneal exudate at first is thin and fibrinous and 
usually scanty, but becomes purulent and greenish in the later 
stages. It is most abundant in the pelvis. 

The mortality among young children is very high, but 
between the ages of ten to fifteen recovery takes place in an 
increasing percentage. 

In pneumococcal peritonitis it is doubtful whether surgical 
drainage of the peritoneum infiuences the course of the 
disease. It is, however, rarely possible to diagnose the 
condition with sufficient certainty to justify expectant treat- 
ment. Consequently, in the majority of cases operation is 
undertaken. 

Streptococcal Peritonitis. — Apart from that occurring post- 
operatively and in the puerperium, this form is indistinguishable 
from primary pneumococcal peritonitis. However, the presence 
of a haemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis sometimes gives the 
clue. In the puerperium the infection spreads by the l}Tnphatics 
from a metritis, and the onset is sudden, the toxaemia profound, 
and the course rapid, vith all the signs of a severe general 
peritonitis. Diarrhoea is commoner than constipation, and the 
vomiting may not be severe. 

Gonococcal Peritonitis. — This form of peritonitis, much 
more common in females, is secondary to gonococcal salpingitis, 
or, in males, to epididymitis. The first signs are in the pelvis, 
but the infection may spread throughout the abdomen. The 
symptoms and signs are similar to other types of peritonitis. 
The prognosis as regards life is usually good, since the process 
tends to become localised as a pelvic peritonitis. Troublesome 
adhesions may, however, result. 

The prognosis of pneumococcal, streptococcal, and gono- 
coccal peritonitis has, of course, been considerably brightened 
by the use of the sulphonaniide drugt^. 

Local Peritonitis. — Inflammation in any of the abdominal 
viscera is accompanied by some degree of local peritonitis. 
The peritoneum in the liver region is involved in inflammation 
of the gall-bladder, in cancer, abscess, or hydatid disease of 
the liver, and in gastric and duodenal ulcers with subacute 
perforation. 

Cholecystitis, appendicitis, and salpingitis are the most 
frequent causes of local peritonitis. The symptoms are localised 
in these areas, with rigidity of the muscle and tenderness 
maximal over the structure affected. Depending on the 
virulence of the infection and the occurrence of perforation 
there is the possibility of spread of the peritonitis. The 
limitation of the ixifeotion by fibrinous adhesions results in 



490 


DISEASES OF THE PERITONEUM 


the formation of a palpable mass. Suppuration may take 
place and subsequent rupture ensue in the absence of surgical 
drainage. If there be no suppuration the process wiU heal, 
leaving dense adhesions. 

Trevor Owen. 


SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS 

iEtiology. — ‘This condition is almost always secondary to 
disease in the abdomen ; very rarely it is a sequel to disease 
above the diaphragm. As would be expected, it more often 
follows disease of the upper abdominal viscera, the most 
frequent cause being perforation of a gastric or duodenal ulcer. 
The only common lower abdominal condition that may cause 
it is acute appendicitis. The spread of infection from the low^er 
to the upper abdomen is by way of the paracolic gutters when 
the patient is lying on his back. The adoption of Fowler’s 
position as a routine procedure after abdominal operations has 
done much to check this complication. 

Morbid Anatomy. — It is usual to describe six separate 
positions in which a subphrenic abscess may form. Four of 
these are intra-peritoneal, the coronary ligament being the 
chief dividing structure and giving right and left, anterior and 
posterior sites. The left posterior is an abscess of the lesser sac. 
The two extra-peritoneal types of abscess are met with less 
often ; the right, which is the more common, lies in the region 
of the bare area of the liver and is usually the result of spread 
of infection from a retro-caecal appendicitis. The left may 
follow perforation of an ulcer or carcinoma of the stomach 
or colon into the retro-peritoneal tissues ; it also follows 
pancreatitis. It presents in the left loin. 

The extra-peritoneal abscesses should lx? carefully distin- 
guished from perinephric abscess, which has a different aetiology 
and a much better prognosis. 

A subphrenic abscess is usually unilocular and single, 
although multiple abscesses may be met with. If secondary 
to biliary disease the pus in the abscess may be mixed with 
bile ; gas-forming organisms are often present. 

Perforation throng the diaphragm into the pleura or lung 
occurs in the later stages and, although sometimes affording 
temporary relief, is a serious sequel. 

Signs and Symptoms. — The onset of a subphrenic abscess 
is often quite insidious, blending as it does w ith the course of 
the primary causal illness ; it is uncommon to find signs and 



SUBPHRENIC ABSCESS 


491 


symptoms pointing directly to its formation. Owing to its 
serious nature and the importance of making an early diagnosis, 
the possibility of a subphrenic abscess should always be kept 
in mind. 

Fever is always present and may be continuous with that 
due to the initial abdominal illness. At other times there is 
a x)eriod of normal temperature lasting perhaps as long as two 
or three weeks before pyrexia returns. In the early stages 
the fever is often continuous or remittent, later it assumes the 
swinging septic type. The patient wastes and looks pale and 
toxic. In neglected cases he becomes grossly cachectic. 

When fever is noticed and search fails to reveal a collection 
of pus elsewhere in the i>eritoneum (e.gr., pelvis), infection of 
the subphrenic region should be thought of. The patient may 
complain of pain in one or other side of the chest ; often he 
will only admit to a slight discomfort when questioned. 
Occasionally there is a severe pleuritic pain. The anterior 
intra-peritoneal abscesses can present below the costal margin 
where they form a palpable tender mass. The posterior ones 
may give rise to tenderness over the lower ribs, and there may 
be actual oedema of the skin and subcutaneous tissues, though 
this is generally too slight to be detected bj’ other means than 
pinching up a fold of skin and comparing it with the skin over 
the lower ribs of the opposite side. 

Abnormal physical signs are often present at the base of 
the corresponding lung, either due to compression of the lung 
or to an actual pleural effusion. The classical picture of 
alternating zones of resonance and dullness, from above down- 
w^ards, due to a layer of gas in the abscess below the 
diaphragm, may sometimes be demonstrated. These abnormal 
physical signs in the chest may lead to a diagnosis of 
pneumonia or empyema, while the imderlying subphrenic 
abscess is overlook^. In subphrenic abscess without an 
accompanying pleural effusion the heart is not displaced as it 
is in the case of a pleural collection. 

It cannot be too strongly stressed that if a patient has 
suffered from an intra'-abdominal illness or ojwation and 
presents anomalous signs at the base of one limg, then a 
diagnosis of subphrenic abso^ should be made and persisted 
in until every step has been taken to exclude it. 

While the presence of a leucocytosis may confirm suspicion 
of the presence of pus, a figure below 10,000 per cubic millimetre 
is often seen in neglected cases, and therefore should not allay 
suspicions. The low figure is probably due to exhaustion of 
the bone marrow £rom severe toxic absorption. For the same 



492 


DISEASES OF THE PERITONEUM 


reason a marked secondary anaemia is almost the rule in all 
but mild cases. 

X-ray examination helps by showing a raised and immobile 
diaphragm, which may also be deformed ; sometimes a sub- 
phrenic fluid level due to the presence of gas and pus is seen. 
In cases where doubt exists as to whether aspirated fluid is 
above or below the diaphragm, injection of some air, by giving 
a fluid level, will supply the answer. 

In general, diagnostic needling to find a subphrenic collection 
is inadvisable, except as an immediate preliminary to opera- 
tion, for infection of an imcontaminated pleura may readily 
follow. This pre-operative needling in any case in which the pre- 
sence of a subphrenic abscess is suspected should be systematic 
and thorough and should include both subphrenic regions. 

Prognosis. — Subphrenic abscess is always a serious con- 
dition ; if not drained it carries a mortality of nearly 100 per 
cent. WTien drained the mortality is about 40 per cent. This 
is partly due to delay in diagnosis, partly due to the fact that 
it so often complicate an already serious abdominal condition 
such as late perforation of a viscus or appendicitis with diffuse 
peritonitis. The infection also readily spreads through the 
diaphragm and adds a chest lesion to the patient’s other burdens. 

Treatment. — Drainage should be provided as soon as the 
diagnosis is confirmed. In many cases this involves rib resection, 
and especial care should then be taken to avoid infection of the 
pleura. This may make a two-stage operation necessary. 

R. C. Beock. 


Ascites 

iStiology and Pathology. — The fluid may bo a transudate 
or an exudate. The former occurs : (1) in myocardial failure ; 
(2) in portal obstruction ; (3) as part of a general dropsy in 
chronic nephritis ; (4) rarely in chronic severe aruemia. 

Ascites due to exudation is seen in various forms of 
peritonitis, such as those due to tuberculosis or carcinoma. 

The Charader of the Fluid . — The fluid in ascites due to 
transudation is clear and straw coloured with a specific gravity 
from 1010 to 1015, but not more. Its protein content is low 
and it contains endothelial cells and a few lymphocytes. When 
due to exudation the fluid may be turbid and the specific 
gravity is over 1015. The protein content is much higher 
than that of a transudate, and the cells are lymphocytes in 
larger numbers, together with a varying number of poly- 
morphonuclear leucocytes depending on the degree of the 
peritoneal irritation. 



ASCITES 493 

In malignant peritonitis tumour cells sometimes, and red 
blood cells frequently, are present. In syphilitic liver disease 
the Wassermann reaction may be positive in the ascitic fluid. 
In tuberculous peritonitis tubercle bacilli cannot be found, 
but inoculation of a guinea-pig results in the development of 
tuberculosis. 

The quantity of fluid varies, ranging from a few hundred 
cubic centimetres to many gallons. 

In chylous ascites the fluid contains fine fat globules but 
no leucocytes and appears yellowish-white in colour. The 
specific gravity is usually above 1012. This condition is 
often associated with obstruction to the thoracic duct, which 
produces an escape of chyle from the lymphatics. A pseudo- 
chylous form also occurs in which the fluid contains only a 
small amount of fat in large globules and lecithin. 

Symptoms. — The enlargement of the abdomen is the most 
noticeable symptom. The gradual distension finally produces 
pressure symptoms, consisting of gastric disturbances, dyspnoea 
from elevation of the diaphragm, and oedema of the feet and 
legs from compression of the inferior vena cava. The urine 
may show albumen and casts for the same reason. The flanks 
bulge in the recumbent position. The skin becomes tight and 
shiny. The costal margins are everted and the respiration 
is largely thoracic. The heart is displaced upwards. On 
palpation a fluid thrill can sometimes be made out by placing 
the pabn of one hand on one side of the abdomen and flicking 
the opposite side with the finger. An enlarged liver or other 
tumour can sometimes be felt by dipping down sharply through 
the fluid. On percussion there is a concave line of dullness 
curving around the sides and above the pubis. As the fluid 
increases the tympanitic central area becomes more and more 
limited imtil only the epigastric region under the xiphistemum 
remains tympanitic. The dullness will shift as the patient 
assumes different positions. When the ascites is considerable 
there is eversion of the umbilicus. Probably at least a litre of 
fluid must be present before it produces any signs. 

Diagnosis. — The commonest cause of diflSculty in the 
diagnosis of the presence of ascites is extreme adiposity of 
the abdominal wall. An apparent fluid thrill conveyed by 
abdominal fat may be mistc^en for the true thrill due to 
fluid in the peritoneal cavity. In these cases the presence 
of movable dullness must be the sign relied upon. With 
the patient in the knee-elbow position the most dependent 
part of the abdomen will be dull on percussion if there be 
any ascites. 



494 DISEASES OF THE PERITONEUM 

Large ovarian and parovarian cysts may simulate ascites 
very closely. In these the dull area is central and the flanks 
are tympanitic. A distended bladder can be distinguished by 
catheterisation. Large hydatid and pancreatic cysts should 
not offer much difficulty. The sudden onset of ascites always 
suggests portal thrombosis. 

Treatment. — Apart from the treatment of the cause of 
ascites, rehef may be obtained by removing the fluid or 
retarding its formation. In hepatic cirrhosis, while the 
collateral circulation is being established, frequent tapping 
is necessary. Paracentesis may be done in the midline about 
half-way between the pubes and umbihcus or in the anterior 
axillary line. 

The intake of fluid should be restricted even to as httle as 
800 to 1,000 c.c. In cases of myocardial failure, diuretics, in 
combination with digitalis, will often afford striking impro\ o- 
ment. Saline purgatives should be given every morning. 
The amount of sodium chloride in the diet should be as low 
as possible : 5 to 10 grm. of ammonium chloride in capsules 
should be given daily. Combined with this the organic mercury 
preparation mersalyl (Salyrgan) should be tried. It is given 
once or twice a week intravenously or intramuscularly in 1 to 
2 c.c. doses. A marked diuresis will usually follow this 
procedure (see p. 506). 


Cabcinoma of the Pebitonbitm 

Primarj'^ growths of the peritoneum are almost unknown, 
but secondary carcinomatous de{>osits are very common, 
especially as metastases from growths of the stomach or 
ovaries. They may vaiy^ in size from minute points little 
larger than a miliarj^ tubercle to large masses of irregular 
shape. The omentum, mesentery, and pelvis are chiefly 
affected. Often owing to the associated ascites no tumours 
are palpable on abdominal examination, though rectal or 
vaginal examination may reveal hard nodules of growth in 
the pelvis. 

The degree of ascites is variable. If fluid is withdrawn it 
may be clear or haBmorrhagic, and sometimes from obstruction 
and rupture of lacteals it is chylous. After tapping, masses 
of peritoneal growth may become palpable. 

The condition has to be distinguished from tuberculous 
peritonitis and cirrhosis. In the former condition the patient 
is usually below the age at which cancer is common. Careful 



CARCINOMA OF THE PERITONEUM 495 

investigation of the history and physical examination may 
reveal evidence of a primary growth. 

The prognosis is always bad, but sometimes in the case 
of ovarian tumours removal of the primary growth, together 
with deep X-ray therapy, may result in a striking improve- 
ment. 

Tbbvob Owen. 



DISEASES OF THE CARDIO- 
VASCULAR SYSTEM 

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE HEART 

B efore considering the morbid changes that occur in the 
heart a brief account is required of its normal physio- 
logical activities. 

Close to the junction of right auricle (right atrium) and 
superior vena cava is to be found a small node of specialised 
neuromuscular tissue, about 2 cm. long, lying close beneath 
the endocardium. Developmentally it represents a remnant of 
the })rimitive cardiac tube, and is known as the sino-auricular 
node (sino-atrial node) of Keith and Flack (S-A node). A 
similar mass of tissue, the aurictUo-ventricular (atrio-ventricular) 
node, lies beneath the endocardium of the right auricle about 
1 cm. above the interventricular septum (ventricular septum). 
A prolongation of this tissue passes downwards in the inter- 
auricular septum (atrial septum) to the top of the interven- 
tricular septum, where it divides to form the left and right 
branches of the bundle of His. These branches pursue a sub- 
endocardial course towards the apices of the ventricles, where 
they spread out to terminate in intimate connection with the 
musculature of the ventricular walls. This 8i)eciali8ed tissue 
forms the only direct functional link between the muscle of 
the auricles and that of the ventricles, whereas part of the 
muscle of one auricle is continuous with that of the other, as 
is also the case in the ventricles. 

Blood Supply ol the Heart. — All three layers of the heart 
are richly supplied with blood vessels. The main ventricular 
supply is through the right and left coronary arteries, which 
arise just above the anterior and left posterior aortic cusps 
respectively. They break up into a fine network of smaller 
vessels and ramify throughout the organ. The left coronary 
artery supplies the bulk of the left ventricle, the interventricular 
septum, a portion of the anterior surface of the right ventricle, 

496 



ANATOMY AND TfiYSlOLOGY OF HEART 49? 

and the left auricle. The right coronary artery supplies the 
right auricle and the right ventricle, and a small part of the 
left ventricle. 

During systole, owing to compression by the contracting 
muscle, the coronary flow ceases, and is resumed during 
diastole. Blood also reaches the intermuscular spaces from the 
ventricular cavity by way of channels known as the inter- 
trabecular spaces or veins of Thebesius. In man their share 
in maintaining the circulation of the organ is probably greater 
than has hitherto been imagined. The anastomosis between 
the branches of the coronary arteries is limited, an anatomical 
consideration that emphasises the gravity of coronary occlusion. 

Nerve Supply. — A large number of fibres from the right 
vagus proceed directly to the sino-auricular node. The cardiac 
fibres of the left vagus end near the auriculo- ventricular node 
and the A-V bundle, in which also nervous tissues are abundant. 
Fibres from the sympathetic system are distributed throughout 
the organ, the coronary vesseb, and the aorta. 

Mechanism of the Heart-beat 

Heart muscle is so constituted that any excitatory stimulus 
causing contraction of one fibre will be conducted to all other 
fibres with which it is connected by muscle tissue. Since 
cardiac muscle fibres are intimately connected so as to form a 
syncytium, it follows that an effective stimulus applied to one 
auricle will cause a wave of contraction to pass over all regions 
of both auricles. The same is true of the ventricles. Heart 
muscle invariably obej'S the “all or none law,” in that once 
excited it contracts to its fullest extent. It possesses a 
particularly long refractory’ period, so that anHhing in the 
nature of a tetanic contraction is impossible, individual con- 
tractions being separated by appreciable intervals. 

The sino-auricular node has been termed by Lewis the 
“ pacemaker ” of the heart and is a centre for the rh\^hmic 
production of a stimulus capable of exciting the surrounding 
auricle to contract. As the contraction begins at the S-A node, 
wliich lies near the openings of the great veins, the closure of 
these is brought about by the shortening of the fibres encircling 
the orifices. The blood in the auricles is thus forced towards 
the still quiescent ventricles. When the wave of contraction 
reaches the A-V node, the excitatory process is picked up by 
this tissue and passed on to the ventricular muscle by way of 
the A-V bundle and its ramifications. Since the speed with 
which this junctional tissue conducts the impulse is relativelj" 
32 



498 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

high, the ventricular tissues contract very nearly simultaneously, 
the mitral and tricuspid valves close, and the blood is forced in 
the direction of the aortic and p\ilmonary vessels. The mitral 
and tricuspid cusps are prevented from being forced through the 
auriculo-ventricular orifices by the action of the chordse 
tendineae. When the ventricles relax, the aortic and pul- 
monary cusps snap together, while the mitral and tricuspid 
valves open to admit auricular blood. 

The time occupied by one complete beat followed by the 
period of rest is termed the cardiac cycle. Clinically, this is 
defined as the time between the begiimings of the first sounds 
in two successive normal beats. The cardiac cycle is in turn 
subdivided into systole and diastole. The former extends from 
the beginning of the first sound to the l)eginning of the second, 
and the latter from the beginning of the second sound to the 
next first sound. The heart of an adult beats normally between 
60 and 80 times per minute, and at this rate the cardiac cj^cle 
occupies about sec. When cardiac muscle contracts it is said 
to be in systole, and when resting and relaxed, in diastole. 
Ventricular systole lasts about sec. and diastole about sec. 
when the rate is 72. The velocity of the pulse-wave from the 
aorta to the wrist is such that the radial pulse tocornes palpable 
nearly J sec. after the apex beat is felt. This fact is of 
importance when timing abnormal sounds or thrills, for con- 
clusions as to whether a murmur is systolic or diastolic may 
be quite misleading when the radial pulse is usc^d as a measure 
of systole. In timing murmurs systole is best gauged by 
palpation of the apex beat or the carotid pulse. It must l>e 
realised, however, that with a rapid heart action the character 
and pitch of an apical murmur provide the chief means whereby 
it can be defined as 83 ^ 8 tolic or diastolic. 

Cardiac Efficiency. — A health}' heart has an ample 
reserve of power for the maintenance of the circulation under 
all conditions of strenuous exertion. In spite of popular opinion 
on the subject, there is Uttle evidencjc that a healthy myocardium 
can be damaged permanently^ bj' strenuous physical exercise. 
Before this can occur, fatigue of nerv'ous or skeletal tissues 
enforce the cessation of effort. 

Under the influence of the teaching of Sir James Mackenzie, 
the importance of the functional efficiency of the heart muscle 
has been recognised. Whereas, previoudy, undue stress was 
laid upon the presence of phj'sical signs, particularly murmurs, 
in the estimation of the severity of cardiac conditions, to-day 
the reaction of the heart to exercise is regarded as the factor 
of prime importance. Many tests of cardlao efficiency are 



PHYSICAL SIGNS OF THE NORMAL HEART 499 


advocated. Though differing in detail, they are all based on 
the fact that in health the heart rate is accelerated by exercise 
and rapidly returns to normal after the cessation of effort. 
The ptilse is taken for 15 secs, with the patient standing. 
He then places one foot on a chair, the other being on the 
floor, and raises himself till both feet are on the chair, then 
lowers himself till one foot is on the floor. This is repeated 
twenty times in 60 secs. At the end of the exercise the pulse 
is taken for 15 secs. He then stands still for 45 secs, and the 
pulse is then taken again for 15 secs. This pulse reading should 
not be appreciable higher than the original resting rate. 
If during the exercise or immediately following it there 
are signs of undue dyspnoea and distress, cardiac eflSciency 
is obviously impaired. Not uncommonly a patient’s own story 
may be of as much or more value than an exercise tolerance 
test. Thus a walk from the station that formerly was not 
noticed may now produce breathlessness or a sense of distress. 

It must be realised that aU exercise tolerance tests, even 
in the case of healthy hearts, give results dependent on the 
training of the individual. Thus the trained athlete may be 
able to j)erform with ease an exercise which would overtax 
the capacity of an untrained man. 

In healthy persons excessive exertion results in a marked 
increase in pul^-rate, and in rate and depth of respiration. 
In addition, there may be sweating and subjective symptoms 
of distress, such as palpitation and even precordial pain. This 
combination is known as the physiological syndrome of effort, 
and occurs in all individuals after what to them represents ex- 
cessive exercise. Exertion which produces violent palpitation 
in an undersized clerk would hardly change the pulse-rate 
of a blacksmith. Hence in judging the exercise tolerance 
of an individual it is important to take into account his 
life and habits. 


PHYSICAL SIGNS OF THE NORMAL HEART 

The physical signs of the heart vary with change of posture, 
and it is a good rule, whenever possible, to examine patients 
standing up, lying down, and lying on Uie left side. Exercise 
and respiration ^so influence the character of the cardiac 
sounds. The following is a brief summary of the findings 
based on the examination of a large number of normal hearts. 

Infection . — On inspection, there is symmetry of the left 
and right halves of the thorax, emd no precoi^al bulging. 



600 DISEASES OP THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

A maximal cardiac impulse, corresponding with the apex of 
the left ventricle and the left border of the heart, may be 
observed in adults usually in the fifth but sometimes in the 
sixth left interspace from 7-6 to 11*6 cm. (3 to 4^ in.) from 
the mid-stemal line, according to the build of the individual. 
The visible impulse may be limited to an area of the size of a 
shilling, or it may be diflhise over a large area and even reach 
the epigastrium. Frequently it is completely absent. The 
apex impulse is the most reliable physical sign we possess of the 
position of the left border of the heart. Its position should always 
be described by stating the distance between the outer limit 
of the maximal impulse and the mid-line, as well as the inter- 
costal space in which it is palpable. Statements regarding the 
position of the apex beat in relation to the nipple are misleivding, 
but its relation to the mid-clavicular line helps to relate the 
actual measurement to the build of the patient. Visible pulsa- 
tion may also occur normally at the second right and third 
left interspaces. The position of the apex impulse varies with 
posture, and when the patient lies on his left side it moves 
towards the axilla for a distance of about an inch. The veins 
of the neck are hardly visible in the upright position, but may 
bulge and pulsate visibly when the subject is supine. 

Palpation . — WTien the impulse is diffuse, the region of 
maximum thrust may be taken as the apex boat. Sometimes 
when there is a diffuse impulse, and particularly during rapid 
heart action, there may be a sensation of a coarse vibration 
over the entire precordium during systole. 

In children the apex beat may Im? higher than in adults, and 
is sometimes found in the fourth space. 

Percussion . — Percussion should not be used in determining 
the position of the left Ixjnier of the heart. This organ is 
overlappe<l by the left lung to a variable extent, which seriously 
interferes with percussion, especially in patients of middle age 
and over. If the apex licat i.s not palpable or visible, the sb^e 
of the heart can only be defined with certainty by means of 
an X-ray examination. Normally, there is no impairment of 
note to the right of the sternum ; if there is, the imiiairment 
is due to the right auricle. Anatomically, the right border of 
the heart is mainly right auricle, and the left l>order mainly 
left ventricle, whereas almost the entire portion of the heart 
covere<l by the precordium is right ventricle, which is partly 
covered by lung to a depth that varies with respiration. 

The Heart Sounds , — To simplify classification of heart 
sounds the precordium is divided into four areas : the aorlic 
area at the second intercostal space to the right of the stemum ; 



PHYSICAL SIGNS SUGGESTING CARDIAC DISEASE 601 

the puhnofiary area at the third interspace on the left border 
of the sternum ; the mitral area roughly corresponding with 
the region of the apex beat and a little internal to it ; and the 
tricuspid area at the sixth right costostemal junction and lower 
end of the sternum. Over these areas are best heard the 
normal sounds originating at the corresponding valvular orifices. 

In the majority of normal subjects the only sounds heard 
over the precordium are the first and second heart sounds. 
In a fair percentage of persons, however, in whom there is 
no discoverable disease of heart or lungs, other sounds may 
be occasionally heard. Among these are blowing sounds or 
murmurs varying in intensity, heard best at one or other area 
and always systolic in time. They may vary with posture 
and the respiratory movements, or disappear and reappear for 
no obvious cause. They are often describe as cardio-rcspirafory 
murmurs. The first or second sound may be reduplicated. 
Whenever such additional sounds are heard, they should 
suggest a specially careful examination of the cardio -vascular 
system for evidence of disease, but should not in themselves 
be taken to indicate a structural change. 

If the stethoscope be placed over a large superficial artery 
nothing is heard unless the vessel be compressed, when an 
intermittent blowing sound simultaneous with the pulse is 
audible. Such a murmur is sometimes encountered during 
auscultation below the outer end of the cla\icles and is obviously 
of no pathological significance. 

Normal Sensations referred to the Precordium , — The majority 
of persons are not conscious of their heart beat, except some- 
times after exercise, when the physiological response to effort 
is piesent. Those of a highly excitable temperament or 
emotional instability may be abnormally conscious of their 
thoracic and abdominal viscera, the heart particularly, although 
a careful examination reveals no evidence of organic disease. 
In such subjects rapid heart action and palpitations are to be 
regarded as of nervous origin and not as signs of a diseased 
heart. 


PHYSICAL SIGNS SUGGESTING CARDIAC 
DISEASE 

Unfortunately, specific structural changes do not always 
lead to specific physical signs that would render diagnosis 
a straightforward and simple matter ; indeed conspicuous 
anatomical changes may occur without giving rise to specific 
physical signs, and be (hsoovered only at autopsy. In general, 



502 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

however, it may be said that the presence of certain well- 
recognised physical signs is not only pathognomonic of cardiac 
damage, but signals damage of a definite character. The most 
important of these is cardiac enlargement. 

Enlargement of the Heart. — The most certain indication of 
organic heart disease is cardiac enlargement. This is true 
whether the increase in size is due to hypertrophy or dilatation. 
Cardiac enlargement known to have been of rapid onset and 
short duration suggests dilatation, perhaps complicated by a 
pericardial effusion. Persistent enlargement present for several 
months suggests that hypertrophy is probably a factor. In 
a heart known to have been enlarged for many months but 
more or less stationary in size, it is not possible to assess how 
much of the enlargement is due to hypertrophy and how much 
to dilatation. Nor is it of prognostic import to differentiate 
between them. All that is necessary is to remember that 
while all diseased hearts are not enlarged^ yet aU unquestionably 
enlarged hearts are diseased. So dogmatic a statement as this 
raises the question whether there is, in the case of the heart, 
no such process as a purely physiological hypertrophy in 
response to increased work over a considerable period, such, 
for example, as occurs without any evidence of disease in one 
kidney after the other is removed. From available data the 
conclusion seems inevitable that enlargement of the organ that 
cam be detected clinically is never to be regarded as of a 
physiological or healthy origin. Healthy men who have lived 
physically strenuous lives, such as athletes and manual 
labourers, do not show clinical cardiac enlargement in the 
absence of coincident disorder referable to the cardio- 
vascular or renal systems, though there may be a slight 
increase in the weight of the heart. Insurance statistics 
also show that the expectation of life is diminished in 
persons with enlarged hearts and no other signs or symptoms 
of disease. 

We may thus conclude that chronic enlargement is the 
result of chronic disease, w'hether progressive or arrested ; 
and that acute enlargement heralds an acute condition, 
whether due to fatigue, anaemia, or inflammation of the 
myocardium. 

It is important that a heart displaecHl by scoliosis or 
pulmonary disease should not be mistaken for one that is 
enlarged. 

Frecordial Thrills and Cardiac Mnrmtura - By a thrill is 
meant a vibration of the thoracic wall felt over the cardiac area 
and communicated to the hand during palpation. It is always 



PHYSICAL SIGNS SUGGESTING CARDIAC DISEASE 503 

accompanied by a murmur, though the converse is not true. 
Murmurs {bruits) may be high pitched and blowing or low 
pitched and rumbling, and sometimes may have a musical 
quality. They occur at any period of the cardiac cycle. They 
may precede, lead up to, or follow the usual heart sounds, or 
replace one or other of these entirely. They may be loud and 
readily audible, distant and faint, or vary in intensity. 

The significance of a cardiac murmur is often a diflScult 
problem. As a general principle it may be said that all dia- 
stolic murmurs indicate organic disease. Systolic murmurs 
on the contrary do not necessarily imply any pathological 
condition. To reach a decision as to the significance of a 
systolic murmur it is necessary to take into account many 
factors, such as the age of the patient, the likelihood of con- 
genital heart disease, his record as regards previous diseases, 
particularly rheumatic fever, chorea and syphilis, and any 
other abnormal physical signs found in the examination of the 
heart. Provided the patient is under middle age, has no history 
of rheumatic fever, chorea, or syphilis, has a good exercise 
tolerance and displays no other physical signs of cardiac 
disease, it is generally safe to assume that a systolic murmur, 
whatever its site or distribution, is of no pathological signifi- 
cance. It is not uncommon to find at autopsy no structural 
abnormality of the heart or great vessels when during life a 
loud systolic murmur had been present. 

Systolic murmurs may alter in character or intensity with 
change in posture and with different phases of respiration. 
Such murmurs are often termed cardio -respiratory and are 
of no pathological significance. Sometimes in diseases affecting 
the lung, such as pneumonia, abnormal sounds synchronous 
with cardiac systole may be heard. These are described as 
exocardial murmurs or sometimes as pleuro-pericardial friction 
sounds. They have no special significance. 

Apart from the systolic murmurs so often heard in appar- 
ently normal hearts, particularly when the pulse-rate is high, 
they are heard also in the following conditions : — 

1. Cardiac enlargement, acute or chronic. 

2. Valvular disease, acquired or congenital, and patent 

ductus arteriosus. 

3. Dilatation of the aorta or aneurysm. 

4. Atheromatous changes in the v^ves. 

6. Hyperthyroidism. 

6. Anosmia. 

7. Convalescence from acute infections. 



504 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

A systolic murmur developing in the course of rheu- 
matic fever may be the first sign of a mitral endo- 
carditis. Where there is imderlying structural alteration in 
the heart or great vessels, 83 ^tolic murmurs are usuaUy 
uninfluenced by posture and the respiratory phase. The 
association of a thrill with a murmur is usually indicative 
of organic change. 

It is important to realise that auscultatory findings form 
only pait of the evidence on which a particular diagnosis is 
based. The entire clinical picture is the only safe basis on 
wliich to found the final conclusion, setiology being always of 
extreme importance. The types of mmrmur associated with 
lesions of individual valves are discussed in the section dealing 
with chronic valvular disease {vide p. 535). 


DISTURBANCES OF RATE AND RHYTHM 

When the heart is beating normally, the stimulus initiating 
contraction arises in the S-A node. A contraction may, 
however, follow a stimidus originating elsewhere in the 
myocardium, and such a beat is often sjx)ken of as ectopic 
in origin. 

The rate of origin of normal stimuli arising in the S-A node 
is under the influence of the vagus nerve, vagal stimulation 
leading to slowing. Stimulation of the sympathetic accelerates 
the heart-rate, but its action is incompletely understood. 
Ectopic foci may exist anywhere in the heart muscle, and give 
rise to isolated beats, or to a series of regular beats for varying 
periods of time. Particularly is this the case when there is 
active disease. The passage of an excitatory impulse, wherever 
it may arise, may be interrupted in its course by so-called 
“ block in the junctional tissues, or by meeting a portion of 
muscle still in the refractory state. These simple principles 
form the basis of our knowledge of irregularities of the heart 
beat. Before describing in det^ the commoner irregularities, a 
brief account of the instrumental means employed for their 
exact analysis will be given. 

The Electrocardiograph.— Einthovcn, in 1903, devised an 
extremely sensitive galvanometer on the principle of a fine 
metal-plated quartz fibre or string (2 p in diameter) 
suspended in a powerful magnetic field. Movements of the 
fibre are magnifi^ many hundreds of times and photographed 
on a moving film or plate. The position of the string ^t a 
particular instant is related to the current flowing through it 



DISTURBANCES OF RATE AND RHYTHM 505 

at that time. It has long been known that muscular con- 
tractions are associated with variations in electrical potential. 
Einthoven devised his instrument to utilise this fact. By 
connecting the fibre to two points on the body surface, it is 
possible to obtain well-marked deflections of the string 
with each contraction 
of the heart. Moreover, 
the form of the deflec- 
tion, or electrocardio- 
gram as it is called, is 
closely related to the 
course of the excitatory 
process in the myocar- 
dium. This instrument 
is in extensive use ; 
it seldom affords much 
information of value in 
valvular disease, but is 
decisive in the eluci- 
dation of obscure ar- 
rhythmias. In suspected 
myocardial disease in 
elderly patients and in 
all cases of thoracic 
pain the electrocardio- 
graphic findings are 
im})ortant. A brief 
description of electro- 
cardiographic findings 
will be appended in 
electrocardiogram is shown in Fig. 8. 

The small deflection P is associated \\ath the excitation 
of the auricles, and the deflections Q, R, S, and T with excita- 
tion of the ventricles. The interval between the l)eginning 
of P and the summit of R is regarded as the time taken for 
the wave of excitation to travel from the S-A node to the 
ventricular muscle. This P-R interval is relatcwi to the con- 
ducting capacity of the junctional tissues, and in the normal 
heart does not exceed 0-20 sec. Electrocardiography has 
grown to be almost a separate brancli of the study of heart 
disease, and an enormous hteraturo has accumulated. For 
ordinary clinical work, Einthoven adopted the leads : Right Arm 
— Left Arm=lead I. ; Right Arm — Left Leg=lead II. ; Left 
Arm — Left Leg==lead III. These leads are now in general use. 

Recently an effort has been made to explore the electrical 



Fio. 8 

Electrocardioji^rafl from the three leads in a 
norma) subject to illustrate the change in the 
tyye of curve with change of lead. Note that R 
is tallest in I^ead II. 

(From “ CUnieal KUctrocardioffraphy,** 
by Sir Thomat Leu%».) 

the following sections. A normal 




506 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

field round the heart by contacts placed close to this organ, 
and a new lead, so>called Lead IV., is coming into use. In this 
one contact is placed on the chest wall just outside the position 
of the apex beat and the other is on the right arm (Lead IV. R) 
or left leg (Lead IV. F), usually the latter. This lead has been 
standardised, and is certainly of value in research and some- 
times provides conclusive evidence of coronary infarction or 
pulmonary embolism where the other leads fail to do so ; it is 
still uncertain if this happens frequently enough to justify the 
extra complications of its routine use for clinical purposes. 

Tachycabdia and Beadycakdia 

By tachycardia is meant a conspicuous increase in the 
heart rate with or without disturbance of rhythm. It may 
continue for long periods or may be limited in duration to 
a few hours or even a few seconds. 

A simple tachycardia is present when the stimulus pro- 
duction in the S-A node is increased in frequency above the 
normal rate for the individual in question, and when it is not 
characterised by an abrupt onset and an equally abrupt 
cess^ition. The latter characteristics define a special form of 
irregularity of rhythm to be described later, namely, paroxysmal 
tachycarfiia. Simple tachycardia is the physiological response 
to exercise, excitement, fear, and emotion. It also commonly 
accompanies any of the following conditions : (1) Pyrexia, 
when the pulse-rate increases roughly by 10 for every 1° F. 
rise in temperature ; (2) convalescence from debilitating 

disorders ; (3) anaemia ; (4) disease of the heart muscle ; 

(5) h3T)erthyroidism ; (6) hysteria, the menopause ; (7) preg- 
nancy ; (8) intoxication with drugs such as alcohol, tobacco, 
atropine, and thyroid extract. 

Simple tachycardia is a symptom of some underlying 
condition, and disappears when this is removed. It seldom 
exceeds 130 beats per minute for long ; when it does so, the 
heart’s action may become seriously embarrassed and this 
leads to distressing symptoms. In simple tachycardia the 
pulse-rate is influenced by changes in posture ; it is also 
increased by the action of atropine on the vagal nerve endings* 
On the other hand, in paroxysmal tachycardia, or that due to 
flutter of the auricles, variations in posture and administration 
of atropine are without effect on the pulse-rate. In the con- 
dition known as the “ effort syndrome ” (vide p. 674), the 
tachycardia is simple in type, but may be complicate by 
extra-fiystoles. In early phthisis prolonged tachycardia may 



DISTURBANCES OF RATE AND RHYTHM 507 


be one of the earliest physical signs. In acute rheumatic 
infections, persistent tachycardia may be the only sign of a 
serious cardiac involvement necessitating prolonged rest in 
bed until the pulse-rate has returned to normal. 

In simple tachycardia the electrocardiograph reveals normal 
auricular and ventricular complexes with, if anything, a 
shortening of the P-R interval. 

Bradycardia. — Heart rates below 70 are common both in 
health and diseatse. A heart rate of 40 or below is, however, 
suggestive of some degree of heart block [vide p. 513). Rates 
between 40 and 60 are often encountered during convales- 
cence from acute illness, during and after jaundice, in conditions 
involving cerebral compression, and in 2 to 1 heart block. An 
abnormally slow heart rate, e.g, 40 to 50, is sometimes found in 
healthy athletes. 

Abnormally low pulse-rates due to non-transmission of 
the ventricular beat to the wrist, as in digitahs poisoning 
with pulsus bigeminus {vide p. 520), do not constitute true 
bradycardia. 

Sinus ARBHYXEtMiA 

In a certain number of young adults, and very commonly 
in children, the pulse -rate shows periodic waxing and waning. 
These variations are related to the respiratory movements, 
the rate increasing during inspiration and slowing during 
expiration. This relationship may often be demonstrated by 
the request to breathe deeply. This so-called sinus arrhythmia 
is due to changes in the rate of origin of impulses in the 
S-A node, and is under vagal control. It is presumably a reflex 
from the vagal terminations in the lungs. During eunvalescence 
after fevers it is often specially noticeable. Pulse irregularity 
obviously related to the respiratory movement is without 
pathological significance. In emotional tachycardia the heart 
rate slows down during a deep expiration. 

Other Sinus Irregularities, — In some people the heart 
rate varies under vagal influence without relation to the 
respiratory movements. A common example of this condition 
is the ordinary S3moopal attack or “ fainting fit in apparently 
healthy individuals, when the heart rate may drop to 50 and 
is accompanied by a sudden fall in blood pressure. The con- 
dition is specially common in persons showing the “ effort 
syndrome.’* Sometimes the feeling of sudden faintness may 
develop into actual loss of consciousness. All sinus irregu- 
larities disappear under the influence of atropine, exercise, 
amyl nitrite, and fever. 



508 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 


Extra-systoles 

When the heart contracts following an impulse arising 
outside the S-A node, the contraction is described as an extra- 
systole or premature beat. These may thus originate in the 
muscle of either auricles or ventricles and are described as 
auricular or ventricular extra-systoles. They may occur singly 
and at long intervals, scattered frequently throughout an 
otherwise regular rhythm in runs of twos and threes, or, as in 
paroxysmal tachycardia, in a continuous stream persisting 
for a considerable period. A ventricular extra-systole is 
followed by a prolonged compensatory pause, as the ventricle 
is refractory to the next impulse transmitted from the auricle. 
With an auricular extra-systole this pause does not occur, as 
the following impulse from the S-A node is sufficiently delayed 
to allow the ventricle to pass out of its refractory period. 
Examples of auricular and ventricular extra-systoles are 
shewn in Figs. 9, 10, and 11. When extra-systoles alternate 
with normal beats they give rise to the so-called pulsus 
bigeminus, a rhythm characteristic of digitalis poisoning. 

Extra-systoles occur at aU ages and under all conditions, 
but their incidence is greatest a^r fifty years of age. They 
may be present without any evidence of myocardial disease. 
When the heart is diseased, however, they tend to be frequent. 
They are associated with the excessive use of tobacco and will 
sometimes cease on omission of the drug. By themselves, i,e., 
unaccompanied by cardiac enlargement, degenerated arteries, 
tachycardia, valvular disease, or other signs and symptoms 
suggesting myocarditis, they are without significance. If 
they occur after or during an attack of chorea or rheumatic 
fever, or if present along with other and definite evidence of 
cardiac damage, they may be regarded as almost certainly 
allied in some way to an underlying inflammation. Not 
uncommonly they constitute the only chnical warning of an 
active process invading the myocardium. For example, the 
persistence of extra-systoles, following an attack of scarlet, 
rheumatic or diphtheritic infection, should suggest a prolonga- 
tion of convalescence until the premature beats are absent or 
relatively infrequent. 

Extra-systoles are recognised clinically either by ausculta- 
tion or by palpation of the radial pulse. They produce 
irregularity in the pulse, both in volume and in rate. When 
very frequent, the irregularity may simulate closely the type 
of pulse met with during auricular fibrillation or flutter of 



DISTURBANCES OP RATE AND RHYTHM 609 

the auricles. The rate is important in this connection. In 
heart rates of over 120 per minute extra-systoles are rare, 
whereas in fibrillation and fiutter the irregularity persists when 
the pulse is raised above 120. This fact provides a simple 
clinical method of distinguishing between extra-systoles and 



Fig. 9 

Lead II. Auricular extra-systoles arising near the sino-auricular node with hardly 
any compensatory pause. The extra-systoles occur each third beat giving pulsus 

trigeminus. 

(From E.C.O., by Dr Maurice Campbell.) 



Fig. 10 

Lead II. Auricular extra-systoles arising in the auricle some way from the sino- 
auricular node and spreading backwards through the auricle as shown by the 
inverted P waves with each premature beat. 

(From E.C.Q., by Dr Maurice CampbelL) 



Fig. 11 

lead II. Ventricular extra-systoles arising after each normal beat giving pulsus 
bigeminus. In Figs. 9 and 10 the premature ventricular beats have the same form 
as the normal beats because the impulse has spread down the A-V bundle in the 
normal way. With ventricular extra-systoles this is not the case. 

(From E.C.O., by Dr Maurice Campbell.) 

fibrillation or flutter ; mild exercise, sufficient to increase the 
heart rate to 120, will usually abolish the irregularity when 
extra-systoles are reponsible, but as the heart rate falls again 
the irregularity may be intensified. In cases of fibrillation or 
flutter, exercise will aggravate rather than abolish the irregu- 
larity. In persons predisposed to premature beats, fatigue 
tends to increase their frequency, particularly during the 
period of slow pulse and bodily fatigue following excessive 




510 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

exertion. If extra-systoles occur during tachycardia they are 
an indication of toxic myocarditis. 

The character of the heart sounds during an extra-systole 
will depend on the precise point during diastole at which the 
extra beat occurs. Should it, for example, occur when the 
ventricles are comparatively empty, the pulmonary and aortic 
valves may not open, and consequently there will be only a 
first sound and no second sound to accompany the extra beat ; 
nor will there be any associated pulse wave at the wrist. 
Frequent extra-systoles may thus give rise to a deficiency in 
the pulse-rate as compared with the ventricular rate in the 
same way as during fibrillation. It should be borne in mind 
that auricular fibrillation is occasionally preceded by frequent 
extra-systoles for a considerable period. 

Extra-systoles do not give rise to any special symptoms, 
and may pass unnoticed by the patient. In nervous individuals, 
however, anxiety may result from the sensation of a ‘‘ thump ’’ 
or “ shock ” in the chest that is occasionally felt to follow a 
premature beat. Normal individuals, when resting quietly, 
may sometimes be conscious of an isolated extra-systole. 
When, however, they occur in paroxysms which frequently 
recur or continue for long periods, distress may be marked. 

Pahoxysmal Tachycabdia 

This term is apphed to tachycardia of limited duration 
characterised by an abrupt onset and an equally abrupt cessa- 
tion. It is due to a regular sequence of impulses arising in 
an ectopic focus in the heart muscle ; such a focus may be in 
the auricles, A-V node, or ventricles. In the two former the 
condition is knowm as auricular or nodal paroxysmal tachy- 
cardia, in the last as ventricular paroxysmal tachycardia. In 
all the tachycardia is really a series of extra-systoles. 

iEtiology. — Paroxysmal tachycardia of auricular or nodal 
origin is relatively common. In a large series studied recently 
more than half occurred in otherwise healthy persons without 
demonstrable evidence of cardiac distress. In many it was 
still true that the heart appeared normal after the paroxysms 
had been present for twenty to forty years. Even where there 
was heart disease the patients often did well for long periods. 
Paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia, on the other hand, occurs 
chiefly in association with congestive failure or coronary 
occlusion. Sometimes it may be brought about by excessive 
doses of digitahs. The prognosis is generally more serious, 
even apart from the associated heart disease. Fortunately 



DISTURBANCES OP RATE AND RHYTHM 611 

it is much less common, and the patient with it is generally 
already under observation because of the condition of the 
heart. The following description refers only to the more 
common disorder, namely, the auricular and nodal type. 



Ventricular tachycardia, rate 208 (auricular activity hidden), from a man with 
myocardial disease. Tracing A, normal rhythm ; B, ventricular tachycardia. 


Symptomatology. — The heart rate during a paroxysm 
remains remarkably steady at a given level for a given 
individual. The rates commonly vary between 150 and 200, 
but may exceptionally be as low as 140 or as high as 240. The 
ventricles beat at the same rate as the auricles. The pulse-rate 
during a paroxysm is uninfluenced by changes in posture. An 
attack may be associated with no unpleasant sensations beyond 
a fluttering in the chest or throat, or it may give rise to profound 
distress, including pain over the precordium, a feeling of fullness 
and distension in the abdomen, flatulent dyspepsia, nausea and 
even vomiting, great fatigue, and attacks of fainting. In 
prolonged attacks the patient becomes cyanosed, and in due 
course all the signs of severe congestive failure may develop. 
The severity of symptoms depends on the degree to which the 
blood pressure falls and the extent of cardiac dilatation. 

Paroxysms may occur at long intervals of months or years, 
or may recur at intervals of days or hours. An attack may 
last from a few seconds to ten days. In a recent investigation 
the usual duration of the paroxysms was more often hours 
than days, but one-third of the patients had paroxysms lasting 


612 DISEASES OP THE CARDlO-VASCtTLAR SYSTEM 

more than a day, 10 per cent, rarely, 10 per cent, often, and 
10 per cent, habitually. They may come on without warning 
at any time, or be precipitated by a heavy meal, excitement, 
or other trivial event. A paroxysm ceases abruptly either 
spontaneously or following change of position of the body, 
placing the head between the knees, pressing on the eyeballs, 
holding the breath under pressure, or the act of vomiting. 
Lewis states that deep pressure below the angle of the jaw over 
one or other of the carotid arteries, when maintained for 10 to 
20 sec., sometimes stops an attack through a reflex of the 
carotid sinus. Many tricks of sudden movement (c.gr., bending 
down to open a low drawer) may stop an attack ; perhaps 
a forced expiration with a closed glottis after a deep inspiration 
is the most generally successful. No measure proves equally 
efficient in every case, though the same measure is often 
successful in an individual patient. 

The more frequent and prolonged the attacks, the worse 
the anxiety and distress ; a paroxysm lasting more than a few 
days usually results in severe prostration. If, during the free 
periods, the cardio-vascular system is apparently sound and the 
exercise tolerance high, and provided the paroxysms are short 
and infrequent, the prognosis remains good. With evidence of 
myocardial damage during normal rhythm, such as generalised 
arteriosclerosis, cardiac enlargement, valvular disease and 
frequent prostrating attacks, the outlook is poor. For though 
sudden death in an attack is a rare event, frequent attacks 
superimposed upon an already damaged myocardium must 
surely increase the rate of myocardial deterioration. 

l^eatment. — When the paroxysm occurs in a patient who 
is otherwise healthy, one of the simple procedures described 
above may sometimes suffice to terminate it. 

Paroxysmal tachycardia is a symptom rather than a disease. 
In a minority of patients, chiefly with ventricular paroxysmal 
tachycardia, it accompanies serious heart disease, and the 
prognosis then is grave. In most patients paroxysmal tachy- 
cardia is not in itself of any grave significance. It is due to 
reflex causes more often than to any primary change in the 
heart muscle. This applies not only to the majority whose 
hearts are otherwise normal but to most of those with rheumatic 
heart disease and to some with other myocardial disease. In 
some of the rheumatic cases, and less often in others, paroxysms 
of fibrillation may alternate with or replace paroxysms of 
tachycardia. In the rheumatic cases established fibrillation 
then becomes a possibility in the near future. 

The prognosis of paroxysmal tachycardia as regards life 



HEART BLOCK 


513 


IS therefore excellent, unless it is of the rare ventricular type, 
unless appearing relatively late in life and as the first indica- 
tion of disease of the coronary arteries, or unless before the 
paroxysms have started there is already serious heart disease. 

During an attack rest should generally be advised, but rest 
in bed is not needed unless special symptoms, or the condition 
of the heart at other times, make it advisable. If an attack 
persists towards evening, bed, with a sedative or hypnotic, 
will generally lead to its arrest. Quinidine, 6 gr., repeated if 
necessary in two hours, is probably the most useful medicinal 
treatment. The cessation of attacks after digitalis has often 
been reported, but it is doubtful if it is effective, and generally 
it should not be given imless indicated by the state of the 
heart apart from the paroxysms, or by the development of 
failure in a long attack. Of newer remedies mecholyl (acetyl-/3- 
methyl-chohne), 15 mg. intramuscularly or intravenously, is 
sometimes successful, but is unpleasant. So far prostigmin, 
0*5 mg. subcutaneously, has seemed more effective and harmless 
to use, but it is early to decide its special indications and limita- 
tions. Morphine is not desirable in ordinary recurrent attacks. 

After the paroxysm the most important question is to 
determine the condition of the heart. If thorough examination 
justifies it, reassurance about the nature of the attacks is often 
all that is called for, and this alone will sometimes greatly 
diminish their incidence. The general regulation of the 
patient’s life as regards food, work, and exercise must next 
be attended to, and in many cases a sedative, such as bromide, 
will be all else that is needed. If, in spite of this, the attacks 
are frequent and troublesome, regular admuustration of quini- 
dine for a time, 3 to 5 gr. t.i.d., will often succeed. 

Differential Diagnosis. — ^A regular pulse-rate of 160 or over, 
paroxysmal in character, is nearly always an indication of 
paroxysmal tachycardia. In auricular flutter and fibrillation 
the pr^e-rate is usually lower, and in the case of fibrillation 
there is in addition a striking irregularity. In doubtful cases 
an electrocardiogram is decisive. 

Heabt Block 

In heart block the power of the conducting tissues to 
transmit impulses is impaired. Thus there may be a delay 
in the passage of the impulse from auricles to ventricles ; or, 
if the block is more severe, only a fraction of the auricular 
contractions reach the ventricular muscle ; in complete block 
no auricular beats reach the ventricles, and auricles and 

33 



614 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO- VASCULAR SYSTEM 

ventricles beat independently. The electrocardiograph reveals 
minor degrees of block which may be clinically unrecognisable ; 
in such cases a prolongation of the P-R interval beyond the 
normal limits (0-20 sec.) is the diagnostic feature. 

Heart block is invariably associated with damage to the 
auriculo-ventricular bundle. In young patients, the cause is 
usually a rheumatic or diphtheritic inflammation, or, less 
commonly, an attack of tonsillitis, but a few instances of heart 
block of congenital origin have been described. In elderly 
persons it is due to some form of chronic myocarditis, most 
often with atherosclerosis. In both groups autopsy reveals 
lesions in the junctional tissues ; in elderly persons, particularly, 
the bundle may be found to be sclerosed, calcified, inter- 
rupted by a gumma or neoplasm, or otherwise involved in 
some gross lesion. 

In slight degrees of block isolated auricular beats may 
fail to stimulate the ventricles, thus giving rise to the so-called 
“ dropped beat.'' This must be distinguished from an extra- 
systole, in which condition there may be no pulse at the wrist, 
although the ventricle contracts. In pulsus bigeniinus alternate 
extra-systoles fail to come through to the pulse at the wrist. 
The condition is often due to digitiilis poisoning and is 
frequently mistaken for the much more serious condition of 
heart block. 

When alternate auricular contractions are followed by 
ventricular responses, we speak of a 2:1 block. This con- 
dition is suggested clinically when the pulse-rate is observed 
suddenly to become halved or doubled. 2 : 1 block is an 
unstable rhythm, readily disappearing under the influence 
of excitement, mild exercise, and certain drugs. It is some- 
times met with in h 5 ^rthyroidi 8 m. The preceding examples 
are known as partial block, for the ventricles are not com- 
pletely cut off from the auricles. In complete block the two 
sets of chambers beat independently, the ventricles contracting 
at their own characteristic rate of below 40. When the 
heart rate is persistently below 35, it is almost certain that 
complete dissociation has occurred. In complete block the 
pulse is regular, of good volume, and unaffected by posture, 
exercise, or drugs influencing the heart rate, such as amyl 
nitrite and atropine. Faint muffled sounds representing the 
auricular beats may be heard in the prolonged diastole, and 
when ventricles €uid auricles beat synchronously an unusually 
loud first sound is heard. In the same way, when auricular 
systole falls near the first or second sounds, reduplication or 
accentuation of either of these may be heard. The electro- 



HEART BLOCK 


515 


cardiogram (Fig. 13) shows clearly the complete dissociation 
between P (auricular) and Q, R, S, T (ventricular) complexes. 

Since heart*' block is merely one sequel to a widespread 
lesion, the symptoms in such cases are those of a progressive 
myocardial disorder. Although there are many instances on 
record where patients with complete block have carried on a 
useful life for many years without unpleasant symptoms, 





Fio. 13 


A curve of complete heart block, or dissociation of the auricular and ventricular 
rhythms. The auricles and the ventricles are beating regularly, but at the 
independent rates of 78 and 29 respectively. 

{From “ Clinical Bleetroeardiography" by Sir Thonuu j 

the prognosis is usually poor. It is not the heart block that 
destroys the patient, but the inevitable cardiac failure 
eventually resulting from the concomitant myocardial damage 
and the grave risks arising from Stokes-Adams attacks. 

Stokes-Adams Syndrome. — It occasionally happens, and 
especially during the transitional stage between partial and 
complete block, that the ventricles fail to beat for a considerable 
period, or contract at rates (below 10 per minute) insufficient 
to maintain an adequate cerebral circulation. Syncopal 
attacks preceded by dizziness ensue, or, when there is prolonged 
diastole, transient imconsciousness and convulsions, ^metimes 
sudden death occurs. Such attacks are to be distinguished from 
minor and major epilepsy, which they may closely resemble ; 
they are, however, much shorter in duration. The characteristic 
slow pulse should settle the diagnosis. 

The treatment of heart block, whether partial, complete, or 
comphcated by Stokes-Adams attacks, calls for no special 
me£k8ures beyond those required for chronic heart disease 
{vide p. 562). Adrenalin (5 to 10 minims of a 1 in 1,000 
solution hypodermically), ephedrine (-1 gr. t.d.s.) and perhaps 
barium chloride (^ to 1 gr. t.d.s.) are said, however, to prevent 
attacks. 

Aubioular Fluttbr 

Auricular flutter is a condition in which the auricles beat 
at a much increased rate in a highly abnormal maimer. 



516 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

Lewis concludes from his experimental work that in flutter 
“ the contraction wave follows a circular and never-ending 
path in the auricle, the complete circuits fading accurately 
repeated usually from 260-320 times per minute in different 
sufajects.” The diagnosis is difficult on clinical examination 
alone, but may be suspected when a rapid heart rate persists 
at an extremely regular rate for longer than would be expected 
with paroxysmal tachycardia, or when the heart appears fast 
and regular at one moment and completely irregular a moment 
later. An electrocardiogi'am shows the increase in the rate 
of the auricular contractions by the presence of an increased 
number of P waves. In flutter, the ventricles rarely contract 
at the same rate as the auricles, and it is usual to find some 
degree of heart block reducing the ventricular rate to some 
simple fraction of the auricular, such as 1 : 2, or, less commonly, 
1:4. In about one-third of the cases the degree of heart block 
is frequently changing and the heart rate is then irregular 
and is very hard to distinguish from auricular fibrillation. 

Nothing is knovm of the underljdng cause. Flutter may 
occur at any age, but is most commonly observed during or 
after middle hfe. The usual setiological factors are a rheumatic 
history, s}q)hilis of the cardio-vascular system, septic foci in 
the alimentary or urinary tracts, persistent high blood pressure, 
with or without renal disease, or atheroma of the coronary 
arteries ; almost invariably there is other evidence of myo- 
cardial involvement such as a low exercise tolerance, murmurs, 
and cardiac enlargement. 

Symptoms and Diagnosis. — Auricular flutter occurs in 
paroxysms, or may persist for life unless it change to fibrillation 
under the influence of digitalis. The symptoms of paroxysmeil 
flutter and paroxysmal tachycardia are very similar. The 
ventricular rate in flutter is seldom as rapid as in paroxysmal 
tachycardia and is usually between 130 and 160. When the 
patient is at rest it may fall conspicuously and become noticeably 
irregular. 

Occasionally instances of persistent flutter show little dis- 
comfort, but this is rare. Patients with a poor exercise tolerance 
.during normal rhythm are much upset by the onset of flutter, 
and evidence of rapid congestive failure may arise. When- 
ever the ventricles take on the full auricular rate, a rare event, 
profound distress or even unconsciousness may supervene. 

Prognosis and Treatment. — The prognosis, as in almost all 
cardiac disorders, depends on the condition of the myocardium. 
The presence of arteriosclerosis, valvular disease, high blood 
pressure, and other complications such as nephritis, or ansemia. 



AURICULAR FIBRILLATION 


517 


must all be taken into account. Treatment should be directed 
towards minimising the work of the heart. The drug of 
choice is digitalis, to which, properly administered, there are 
no contraindications. Under its influence, the flutter may 
continue without change, or give way to fibrillation. On 
omitting the drug, the fibrillation may cease and be replaced 
by normal rhythm. When the flutter persists, digitalis slows 
the pulse with marked benefit. K digitalis fails to restore 
normal rhylhm and if the case is otherwise suitable (see p. 521) 
quinidine should be tried and may be effective. If congestive 
failure is present, the patient must, of course, be confined to 
bed and suitable measures employed. 

Auricular Fibrillation 

With the exception of ex tra-s3 stoles, auricular fibrillation 
is tlie most common of the arrhytlimias, and it is by far the 
most important. It is a condition in which there is no syn- 
chronised and orderly contraction of the auricular muscle. 
Individual groups of muscle fibres contract intermittent^, 
frequently, and independently^. Lewis ascribes the condition 
to a wave of contraction coursing continuously, and by different 
paths, roxmd the auricle at a rate of over 400 cycles per minute, 
thus differing only in degree from the allied condition of flutter. 
The fibriUating auricles dilate and do not contribute to the 
passage of blood into the ventricles. This dilatation occasion- 
ally leads to intra-auiicular clotting, with grave danger of 
embolism. Should a clot become detached from the right 
auricle, a branch of the pulmonary artery may become blocked 
and cause sudden death or infarction of the lung {vide p. 596). 
Emboli from the left auricle lodge in the arterial system, not 
uncommonly in the brain. Disasters of this kind are especially 
liable when fibrillation suddenlj^ gives way to normal mechanism, 
the first forcible contraction of the auricles dislodging a 
portion of the clot (see also (Contraindications to Quinidine, 
p. 521). 

The jimctional tissues fail to transmit to the ventricle 
the great majority of the auricular impulses ; only a fraction 
are effective in producing ventricular contractions, which occur 
at irregular intervals. It is assumed that in all cases of fibrilla- 
tion there is some degree of heart block, and it is by increasing 
this block that digitalis produces its beneficial effect in slowing 
the ventricular rate. 

iEtiology. — Auricular fibrillation, whether paroxysmal or 
permanent, may be a feature of almost any form of heart 



518 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

disease. Before middle age its incidence is greatest as a sequel 
of rheumatic carditis, and it is particularly common in patients 
with mitral stenosis. Rarely seen before sixteen years of age, 
its incidence rises with age, and when congestive failiire occurs 
in the subjects of rheumatic heart disease, fibrillation is the 
rule. In later life, however, it is a common complication of 
any form of myocardial insufficiency, particularly that due 
to the fibroid and fatty changes associated with generalised 
arteriosclerosis, clironic nephritis, and disease of the coronary 
vessels. Hyperthyroidism is a particularly important factor 
in the causation of fibrillation, and should be suspected in all 
unexplained cases after middle age. In a small percentage of 
cases paroxysmal fibrillation may occur without obvious cause. 

Diagnosis and Symptoms. — Fibrillation may be either 
paroxysmal or permanent. Paroxysmal attacks usually last 
only a few hours and seldom persist for more than three or 
four days, and the longer the individual attacks last, the greater 
the probability of fibrillation becoming permanently established. 
As a general rule, an attack continuing for a week is likely to 
continue indefinitely imless terminated by quinidine. Rarely 
in acute infections such as pneumonia or cystitis there may be 
an isolated paroxysm of fibrillation, which is usually of short 
duration. 

The onset of fibrillation is sometimes preceded by frequent 
extra-systoles, and a careful watch is necessary to detect the 
change over from one arrhythmia to the other. The important 
and characteristic feature of this condition is the complete 
irregularity of the pulse both in volume and rhythm. This 
irregularity is usually detected with ease, except when the 
pulse-rate is imusually low and the heart beats evenly spaced. 
When the pulse is both rapid and irregular, fibrillation should 
always be suspected. Wbien it supervenes in a heart wdth 
mitral stenosis, the typical crescendo presystolic murmur in 
the majority of cases disappears, and a low-pitched rumbling 
diastolic murmur remains to indicate the stenosis. Since the 
auricles do not contribute to the blood flow into the ventricles, 
the ventricular output is related to the length of the diastolic 
pause. After a particularly short diastole there may be in- 
sufficient blood in the left ventricle to produce a pulse in the 
radial artery, hence the characteristic pulse deficit, t.e., the 
difference between the pulse-rate at the wrist and the heart 
rate as counted over the precordium. The electrocardiogram 
displays no recognisable P waves, and the Q, R, S waves are 
unequally spaced (see Pig. 14). 

As in all cardiac disease, the symptoms depend mainly on 



AlIRTCULAR FIBRILLATION 


519 


the efi&ciency of the myocardium, which is much reduced by 
an excessive rate due to fibrillation of the auricles. Patients 
with fibrillation and a normal pulse-rate may remain in fairly 
good health for a long time, even up to ten or more years, and 
it is only when the myocardium fails or the heart rate rises that 
signs of distress appear. It is noteworthy how seldom fibrilla- 
tion is accompanied by cardiac pain. In a large number of 
persons dying of progressive cardiac failure, fibrillation of the 
auricles appears sooner or later, and unexpectedly sudden 



Fig. U 


From a case of fibrillation undcT treatment with digitalis. It shows irregularity of 
the ventricle and inversion of T. The oscillations are small ; P does not appear. 

{From '* Clinical Fleetrocardiogtaphy'' by Sir Thomac Letoit,) 


death may perhaps be due to the fibrillation spreading to 
the ventricles. The differential diagnosis of auricular fibrilla- 
tion and frequent extra-systoles has been discussed on 
page 509. 

Treatment and Prognosis. — The reputation of digitalis as 
a cardiac tonic was derived from its efficiency in the treatment 
of fibrillation. By its action in diminishing the conductivity 
of the bundle of His, the ventricles are shielded from the frequent 
and irregular impulses originating in ectopic foci in the auricles. 
Their rate slows down, the coronary circulation improves, and 
the efficiency of the myocardium is enhanced with marked 
improvement in the circulation. Under its influence in cases of 
advanced failure the output of urine is greatly increased, 
dyspnoea diminishes, cyanosis becomes rapidly less marked, 
and mental symptoms disappear. In acute failure digoxin 
(vide p. 521) has largely replaced strophanthin ; it may be 
given intravenously and after an interval digitalis should be 
pushed to its full physiological effect. 

There is no evidence that digitalis can cause fibrillation 
to revert to a normal mechanism. Quinidine, on the other 
hand, in a proportion of cases of established fibrillation, quite 
definitely brings about a sudden change to normal rhythm, 
but only a small proportion of oases are suitable for this 
treatment (vide p. 521). 




520 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO -VASCULAR SYSTEM 

Many cases of established fibrillation have been observed 
for a great many years, without apparent deterioration. Their 
exercise tolerance, however, remains consistently low. Such 
persons are best kept on small doses of digitalis, suitably spaced, 
to keep the ventricular rate at an optimum level. 

Whereas, in established fibrillation, treatment with digitalis 
should always be tried, it must be remembered that in 
paroxysmal fibrillation its effect may be to render the 
arrhythmia permanent. Except in the rare cases where this 
is desirable, digitalis should be avoided and an attempt made 
to terminate the paroxysms by means of quinidine, which may 
have to be given over a long period (vide p. 521). Most 
paroxysms of fibrillation, however, cease without treatment, 
but quinidine, given regularly in doses of 5 gr. thrice daily, 
may assist in diminishing the frequency of attacks or lead to 
their total disappearance. 

Administration ot Digitalis and Quinidine. — The effect of 
digitalis on any tachycardia except that due to fibrillation or 
flutter is doubtful. It is frequently ])rescri})ed with alleged 
good results in many conditions associated with an acute 
or chronic m 5 '’ocarditis. It is, however, chiefly in auricular 
fibrillation with tachycardia that its value is outstanding. 

The guide to the dosage of digitalis is the heart rate and 
the relief of symptoms. Its administration should aim at 
keeping this at an optimum level in the region of 70 to 80. 
When the rate falls below this level, symptoms of intoxication 
such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and headache may appear. 
The j[)uhm bigcvnnus. in which every alternate contraction 
is an extra-systole, is characteristic of digitalis iK)i8oning, 
and the appearance of coupled beats is always an indication 
to withhold the drug, which has a cumulative action. In 
feverish patients it is unwise to reduce the pulse-rate below 
90 to 100, slight tachycardia being a normal accompaniment 
of pyrexia. To continue the drug in the face of warning signs 
may lead to sudden death from direct cardiac poisoning. 

Dosage . — Most preparations of digitalis are standardised by 
biological assay in terms of international units. Powdered 
digitalis leaf (1 gr.) and tincture of digitalis (10 minims) are 
equivalent according to this standard, but there is so much 
variation in each patient, mainly owing to the different amounts 
that can be excreted in twenty-four hours by the kidneys, that 
the coiTCct dosage has to be found in each case. Difficulties 
also arise because many days elapse before an effective con- 
centration in the blood is reached with most preparations of 
digitalis, and the amount that can safely be given to an ijil 



AURICULAR FIBRILLATION 521 

patient who has not had any previously is very different from 
the amount that is needed regularly. 

When a patient who has not been given digitalis has auricular 
fibrillation and congestive failure or other indications for 
digitalis therapy, it may be urgent to get him under control 
within as few hours as possible, and for this purpose massive 
digitalisation was introduced, but owing to the risks of this 
treatment it is generally better, since the introduction of 
digoxin, to use this drug, and 1*5 mg. by mouth or 0*75 mg. 
intravenously is recommended in such cases. This is safer than 
massive digitalisation with the tincture and safer and much 
more effective than intravenous strophanthin ; with the latter 
tlie effective dose and the toxic dose are so close that it is often 
difficult to get any useful control without producing vomiting. 

When it is less urgent to get full control at the earliest 
possible moment, or when a small dose of digitalis hae been 
given ineffectively, a single dose of 1 to 1^ drachms of the 
tincture may be given, followed six hours later by 20 mim’ms 
t.d.s. until the full effect is obtained. Small doses may then 
suffice and be carried on over long periods. When a patient 
has been fully digitalised the object is to find the optimum 
maintenance dose, i.e., enough to get the best j>ossible control 
of the heart without giving rise to toxic symptoms. The 
authors have found in practice that 12^ minims of a good tincture, 
or 1 gr. of powdered digitalis leaves, 0*25 mg. digoxin, or 
gr. of Nativelle’s digitaline may be taken as equivalent, 
and in an average case the dose needed is tliis amount three 
times a day. It will be noted that these equivalents found 
useful clinically are not quite the same as those quoted from 
pharmacological standardisation on animals. There are, of 
course, many preparations nearly or quite as good, but the 
important thing is that the practitioner should confine himself 
to a small number of digitalis preparations so that he can 
become really familiar with them. It is still not realised 
universally that in fibrillation digitalis generally needs to be 
continued for the rest of the patient’s life. 

Some patients show an idios 3 mcrasy to digitalis, as shown 
by vomiting after small doses ; in this event Nativelle’s 
digitaline may be better tolerated. 

Quinidine may be used in an attempt to abolish fibrilla- 
tion, providing the following contraindications have been 
excluded : — 

(a) Idiosyncrasy to the drug, as shown by rashes or by 
distressing symptoms, such as vomiting and tachycardia, 
following an initial trial dose of 3 gr. 



522 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

(6) The presence of venous engorgement or congestive 
failure as shown by cyanosis, oedema, enlarged liver, or dyspnoea. 

(c) A history of continuous fibrillation for six months or over. 

(rf) Considerable enlargement of the heart (more than 14 cm. 
maximum transverse diamet/cr in a patient of about 10 stone). 

(e) A history of recent haemoptysis and pleurisy, suggesting 
pulmonary embolism of intracardiac origin, or a history of a 
systemic embolism, e.g., an attack of hemiplegia. 

Quinidine has an important place in the treatment of 
auricular fibrillation — provided the cases are carefully selected. 
The ordinary patient seen in hospital is quite unsuitable ; the 
risk is too great, and if fibrillation is arrested it generally 
returns soon. Satisfactory results are obtained by paying atten- 
tion to three main criteria : the absence of congestive failure, 
of a greatly enlarged heart, or of a long history of fibrillation. 

The case is eminently suitable for treatment with quinidine 
and should certainly be given this opportunity of regaining 
normal rhythm, if there have been no signs of failure, and if 
the heart is only slightly enlarged (less than 13 cm. maximum 
transverse diameter in a patient of about 10 st.), and if fibrilla- 
tion has been established less than one month. 

When there is mitral stenosis these conditions must be 
strictly observed. Least attention need be paid to them if 
fibrillation is due to a goitre, as, if necessary, partial thyroid- 
ectomy will convert an unfavourable case into one favourable 
for quinidine. 

On the first day of treatment witli quinidine one 5-gr. 
tablet is given, preferably in the morning. On each successive 
day an additional 5 gr. is given two hours after the previous 
dose, but the amount should rarely exceed a total of 30 gr. 
in twenty-four hours. The dnig is best given in 5-gr. doses 
at two-hourly intervals ow ing to the fact that it is very rapidly 
excreted. A careful watch must be kept for signs of poisoning, 
as evidenced by an untoward increase in the ventricular rate. 
There is no knowing how long normal rhythm may continue 
when it does appear. In many cases the quinidine is without 
effect. Rarely fibrillation will revert to nonnal rhythm within 
a few hours of a single dose. 

PtJLSus Alternans 

When the radial pulse is alternately weak and strong, 
though regular in time, it is described as pulsus altemans. 
It is to be distinguished from an alternate weak and strong 
pulse, separated by shorter and longer intervals, that is 



CARDITIS 


623 


characteristic of alternate extra-systoles, i,e., the pulsus 
bigeminus. Pulsus altemans may be readily felt on ordinary 
palpation, but its character is best demonstrated by slowly 
inflating the sphygmomanometer cuff and observing that, at 
a certain critical level, the pulse at the wrist becomes exactly 
halved. Pulse tracings also demonstrate its alternating 
character. The electrocardiogram shows either nothing of 
note or, rarely, a corresponding alternation in the amplitude 
of the R waves. The importance of the phenomenon lies 
in the fact that it is frequently associated with advanced 
myocardial disease with an ominous prognosis. 

It is often observed in association with high pulse-rates, 
as in simple paroxysmal tachycardia ; when found at ordinary 
rates, persistent high blood pressure, arteriosclerosis, renal 
disease, or angina pectoris are usually present, and it is often 
noticeable with gallop rhythm {vide p. 546). Rarely it is seen 
in digitalis therapy with large doses. 


CARDITIS 

By the term carditis is meant an inflammatory process 
involving the myocardium, pericardium and endocardium. 
Although obvious morbid changes may not be present through- 
out all the tissues of the heart, there is in most cases more than 
a localised lesion of one particular portion. Thus, rheumatic 
pericarditis is always associated with some degree of myocarditis, 
and endocarditis does not arise as a separate entity apart from 
damage to the myocardium. It is therefore permissible to 
employ the term caiditis in a wide sense to imply an inflammation 
of the heart, whether it involves the myocardium alone, or 
in addition the endocardium and pericardium. 

In such a sense carditis is an accompaniment of, and 
sometimes the most Important feature in, a number of infections, 
including especially rheumatic fever and diphtheria, and, less 
commonly, scarlet fever and pneumonia. Of these, needless to 
say, rheumatic fever is by far the most common and important, 
though in any severe infective process such as a septicaemia, 
the extent of cardiac damage is often the deciding factor in 
prognosis. 

Although carditis in a mild degree probably accompanies 
most general infections or toxaemias, our knowledge of the 
morbid changes associated with the condition in its early and 
milder stages is necessarily limited by the fact that recovery 
usually takes place, and it is only in the more severe grades 



524 DISEASES OF THE CARDTO- VASCULAR SYSTEM 

of carditis that there is any opportunity for study of the process 
from its anatomical and histological aspects. 

I<>om the clinical point of view carditis, as the result of 
acute infections, is far more common among children than 
among adults, and in rheumatic fever it may sometimes be 
the only obvious manifestation of the disease. Moreover, 
as carditis is frequently associated with some infective process 
elsewhere, it is often overlooked, as the s 5 miptoms of cardiac 
involvement may be overshadowed by those of the disease 
which is producing it. When the heart muscle is chiefly 
involved there may be little in the way of phj^ical signs, and 
the diagnosis of carditis may have to rest chiefly upon symptoms 
and the probability of its occurrence. 

Having emphasised the fact that there is a close relationship 
between all inflammatory processes which involve the various 
tissues of the heart, it is now permissible to deal individually 
with ailections of the muscle, the pericardium, and the endo- 
cardium. Of these, perhaps the most important is myocarditis, 
as it is primarily upon the adequate functioning of the heart 
muscle that life depends. Moreover, in ever}" inflammatory 
condition of the heart the mvocardium is invariably affected. 


ACUTE MYOCARDITIS 

The pathological changes found in myocarditis have been 
mainly studied in acute rheumatism. The most striking gross 
c hange is enlargement of the heart, particularly of the ventricles ; 
thus the heart may be found to be both larger and heavier 
than normal. As a result of the process of dilatation, the 
auriculo-ventricular orifices are wider than normal. Histo- 
logical examination shows localised collections of large branching 
cells with multiple nuclei and an admixture of lymphocytic 
cells ; these are termed Aschoff's bodies or submiliary nodes, 
and occur in the heart muscle aroimd the smaller arterioles, 
particularly under the endocardium and the pericardium. In 
other infections, such as diphtheria or scarlet fever, the changes 
are not so characteristic as in rheumatic fever, but the muscle 
cells show evidence of an acute inflammatory process, with 
infiltration of round cells and leucocytes. 

It has already been pointed out that myocarditis produces 
no typical physical signs. Displacement of the apex beat to 
the left will indicate increasing enlargement, and the apex beat 
may become diffuse. The first sound may change in quality 
and become fainter, often a point of considerable diagnostic 



PERICARDITIS 


importance. A systolic murmur is often present. Some- 
times, too, there is an absence of symptoms, and the heart 
may have been considered to be unaffected imtil sudden failure 
occurs, sometimes even during convalescence. In some cases 
involvement of the myocardium may be suggested by persistent 
tachycardia, by various arrhythmias, such as extra-systoles, or 
occasionally by bradycardia. In severe myocarditis sudden 
death may occur, or there may be symptoms of congestive 
cardiac failure with cyanosis, oedema, and dyspnoea. The 
recognition of myocarditis is of extreme importance, and in the 
affections which are specially liable to attack the heart, great 
care must be taken to aUow an adequate period of rest. 


PERICARDITIS 

Rheumatic pericarditis is relatively rare, and its occurrence 
always signifies grave involvement of the myocardium. Apart 
from rheumatic fever, it may arise in pneumonia and septic 
infections, such as osteomyelitis and pyaemia. In the young, 
acute rheumatism and osteomyelitis are the chief causes, 
but it also occurs in older persons as a terminal infection in 
chronic diseases, particularly nephritis. Pericarditis is often 
a feature of infarction of the myocardium. Both tuberculous 
and malignant pericarditis are uncommon ; they are often 
associated with a blood-stained effusion. 

Pericarditis may or may not be accompanied by an effusion, 
but there is no justification for drawing any sharp distinction 
between a simple fibrinous pericarditis and that in which there 
is also a pericardial effusion, as the basic pathological process is 
similar, although the physical signs produced are very different. 
The normal smooth glistening surface of the pericardium 
becomes roughened by the exudation of lymph, which coagulates 
and forms a fibrinous laj^er over the heart. The process may 
involve only localised areas in the pericardium, hut frequently 
it is more generalised ; in the milder cases there is little or no 
effusion, but often the pericardium becomes gradually distended 
with fluid wliich may be serous, blood-stained, seropurulent or 
purulent. When pericarditis is extensive, the pericardium is 
very much thickened with a rough and shaggy surface. If the 
patient survives the acute stage, organisation of the coagulated 
l3anph takes place, and the visceral and parietal layers of the 
pericardium may become firmly adherent together, and thus 
produce the condition known as adherent pericaniium. 

Physical Signs and Symptoms of Pericarditis. — ^Pericarditis 



626 DISEASES OP THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

occurs secondarily to disease elsewhere in the body, and often 
the symptoms are overshadowed by those of the primary disease. 
This is specially true in the terminal pericarditis associated with 
chronic nephritis, when it is not imcommon to find unsuspected 
pericarditis at autopsy. The onset of pericarditis may be 
associated with precordial pain, which is often aggravated by 
coughing, deep breathing or movement. With pericardial 
effusion dyspnoea, restlessness and insomnia are often marked 
features ; the distress is more striking when the effusion has 
collected rapidly. When the effusion is purulent, as in pyaemia, 
the skin is ashy-grey in colour, and the patient is obviously 
extremely ill. 

On physical examination in the early stages, the heart is 
found to be enlarged, and occasionally fremitus may be felt ; 
a friction rub is heard, which is to and fro in character, 
corresponding with systole and diastole. The intensity of the 
rub varies considerably in individual cases, and from time to 
time in the same case. It is harsher and more grating in 
character than a to-and-fro valvular murmur, sounds close 
to the ear, and often becomes louder on pressing the stethoscope 
firmly against the chest. As rheumatic pericanlitis occurs 
mainly in severe carditis, there is necessarily an associated 
involvement of the heart muscle. 

With the development of a pericardial effusion there is a 
marked change in the physical signs ; a rub previously audible 
over the whole precordial area may disappear completely as 
the layers of the pericardium become separated by fluid ; more 
often, however, it may still be heard over the base of the 
heart when the patient is examined lying down, as the fluid 
gravitates to the back of the pericardial sac ; the area of 
cardiac dullness is increased and, with a large effusion, assumes 
a characteristic pear-shaped form with the apex pointing 
upwards ; the dull area extends to the right of the sternum 
and tends to fill up the cardio-hepatic angle ; the apex beat 
becomes more diffuse or may disappear completely, and the 
sounds become muffled and indistinct. The percussion note 
over a ^ricardial effusion is very dull and “ board-like,** thus 
resembling that heard over a pleural effusion. In oases of 
doubt an X-ray examination is of great value. The heart 
shadow occupies a median position in the thorax, and the 
shadow cast to the right of the spine is often as large as that 
on the left side. With the fluorescent screen, pulsation is 
absent with a pericardial effusion, whereas with enlargement 
due to dilatation and hypertrophy, it is more easily visible 
than usual. 



PERICARDITIS 


527 


The presence of a pericardial effusion may be established 
by exploratory pimcture. The most satisfactory site is a 
point in the fifth left interspace about 1 in. internal to the 
outer limit of the cardiac dullness. A wide needle is used and 
is inserted slowly, unattached to a syringe ; if the needle comes 
in contact with the heart this will usuafiy become immediately 
apparent by the movement of the needle with each cardiac 
systole. Most physicians must, however, at some time have 
had the somewhat alarming experience of exploring the 
cavity of the ventricle while attempting paracentesis of the 
pericardium. There is no difficulty in the recognition of such 
an accident, as blood spurts out through the needle at each 
heart beat. Strange to relate, even when pierced by a needle, 
the heart usually continues beating normally, and on with- 
drawal the muscle of the ventricle immediately closes the 
perforation. 

Treatment of Pericarditis. — There is but little evidence that 
the older remedies for pericarditis, such as the application of 
leeches or ice-bags, have any material effect. In view of the 
inflammation of the heart, absolute rest with good nursing 
is of prime importance. When a large effusion is present, 
particularly if it has accumulated rapidly, the heart’s action 
is embarrassed, and paracentesis must be performed. Usually 
the withdrawal of several hundred cubic centimetres of fluid 
gives marked relief. With a purulent effusion, recourse must 
be had to surgical drainage. This is particularly important in 
cases associated with pneumonia or osteomyelitis. When pain 
is severe, morphia is required. 

Prognosis . — In pericarditis of rheumatic origin the prognosis 
depends on the associated damage to the heart muscle and 
valves and complete recovery is unusual. On the other hand, 
in pericarditis associated with osteomyehtis and pyaemia the 
heart muscle is much less affected, and if the patient survives 
the ultimate outlook is good. 

Adherent Pericardium and Constrictive Pericarditis 

Following acute pericarditis, whatever its cause, the visceral 
and parietal layers of the pericardium may become adherent 
and in addition in some cases adhesions may form between the 
adherent pericardium and surrounding structures, such as the 
pleura, diaphragm, and chest wall. This may result in the heart 
being enclosed in a thick fibrous casing, which in the course 
of time may become to some extent calcified. Adherence 
between the layers of pericardium alone is unlikely to cause 



528 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

symptoms and is usually only detected as a cliance finding at 
autopsy. If, however, the pericardium is much thickened and 
becomes adherent to other structures, the contractions of the 
cardiac muscle are restricted. Moreover, the thickened peri- 
cardium often obstructs the entry of venous blood, chiefly 
from the inferior vena cava, thus producing back pressure in 
the liver and lower limbs with resulting oedema and ascites. 
This condition is termed constrictive pericarditis. 

Although rheumatic fever is the most frequent cause of 
acute pericarditis it is rare for it to produce symptoms which 
can be ascribed to constrictive pericarditis. Most patients 
with constrictive pericarditis have no rheumatic history and 
have often had no obvious cardiac disease until in early adult 
life they begin to develop increasing dyspnoea which is followed 
by oedema of the legs, ascites with hepatic enlargement, and 
sometimes pleural effusions. Examination, clinical and radio- 
logical, usually shows no cardiac enlargement and sometimes 
in an X-ray calcification of the pleura may be visible. The 
apex beat and the position of the heart are fixed, i.e., there is 
no shift with change of posture. If the heart is enlarged there 
is likely to be evidence of a valvular lesion, such as aortic 
regurgitation , which explains the enlargement. Constrictive peri- 
carditis should be suspected when a previously healthy adult 
below middle age insidiously develops dyspnoea and oedema. 

The clinical syndrome of hepatic enlargement with ascites, 
oedema, and pleural effusions was described by Pick nearly 
fifty years ago and is often known as Pick's disease. It is now 
usually described as constrictive pericarditis. 

The nature of the imderlying pathological process is un- 
certain. Few if any cases are due to rheumatic fever, and 
though tuberculosis has been suggested as a factor there is little 
direct evidence in support of this assumption. 

Following rheumatic pericarditis the layers of the pericardium 
may become adherent, but it is probable that subsequent 
symptoms of cardiac insufficiency are due to myocardial and 
valvular lesions rather than the adlierent pericardium. 

Medical treatment in constrictive pericarditis is of little 
avail but striking improvement may result from resection of 
as much of the thickened pericardium as is possible. As the 
outlook without surgery is bad it is justifiable to advise opera- 
tion, especially if the pericardium is shown to be calcified. 

Various physical signs have l>een de8cril>ed as indicating 
an adherent pericardium : a diffuses ajKjx beat, fixity of apex 
beat, systolic retraction of the precordial intercostal spaces, and 
Broadbent’s sign (systolic retraction of the chest wall ovorl 3 ring 



ENDOCARDITIS 


529 


the eleventh and twelfth ribs). None of these are pathogno- 
monic of the condition. It is probable that except in con- 
strictive pericarditis the symptoms ascribed to adherent 
pericardium are due to other causes such as rheumatic 
myocarditis and valvular lesions with great cardiac enlargement. 


ENDOCARDITIS 

By the term endocarditis is meant an inflammatory condition 
affecting the lining membrane of the cavity of the heart ; 
occasionally the endocardium covering the muscular wall of 
the heart is involved, and such a condition is described as 
mural endocarditis, but more often the inflammatory process is 
confined to those folds of the endocardium which form the 
valves. Endocarditis involving only the valves on the right 
side of the heart is rare, apart from congenital heart 
disease. 

Much confusion has arisen as regards the nomenclature of 
endocarditis, owing to the fact that terms are often used in 
different senses by various authors. All forms of endocarditis 
are almost certainly infective, yet the term infective endo- 
carditis is often limited to a special type characterised by 
ulceration of the valves and multiple embolic phenomena. 
This special type is best described imder the heading of 
bacterial endocarditis. 

From a clinical and pathological point of view endo- 
carditis may be grouped into five types : — 

1. Simple endocarditis, almost always due to rheumatic 
infection and part of a general carditis. 

2. Acute bacterial endocarditis, which is due to infection by 
the staphylococcus, Streptococcus hoemolyticus, pneumococcus, 
gonococcus, or other organisms. 

3. Subacute bacterial endocarditis, due to the Streptococcus 
viridans. 

4. Syphilitic aortitis spreading to the aortic vjJve, and 
rarely to the anterior cusp of the mitral valve. 

6. Tuberculous endocarditis consisting of endocardial miliary 
tubercles (very rare). 

In simple endocarditis no micro-organisms can be cultivated 
from the valves, and there is a tendency toward the develop- 
ment of chronic fibrotic changes. The second type, aeute 
bacterial endocarditis, which is alwa}^ fatal, is but one 
manifestation of a general acute septicfismic process due to 
invasion of the blood by bacteria. The third type, subacute 

34 



530 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

bacterial endocarditis, is midway between the other two in so 
far that attempts at healing may sometimes occur, and it is 
nearly always associated with one specific type of organism, 
the Streptococcus viridans. 

Before attempting separate descriptions of these three 
types of endocarditis, it is necessary to emphasise certain 
features which are common to all three varieties. It has 
already been stated that endocarditis affects mainly the valves 
on the left side of the heart, except in congenital heart disease. 
The tricuspid valve, however, is often found to be involved in 
conjunction with a mitral and aortic endocarditis. 

The earliest pathological changes in endocarditis are the 
formation of sms^ elevated areas along the line of closure of 
the valves ; these are known as vegetations. In the simple 
or rheumatic type these vegetations are generally small, as a 
rule a few millimetres in diameter, but in acute and subacute 
bacterial endocarditis they are often large and friable. The 
vegetations are composed of blood platelets and fibrin deposited 
upon the swollen endothelium ; sometimes it is possible to 
isolate micro-organisms from the vegetations, but in many 
cases, and always in simple endocarditis, blood culture is 
negative, and no organisms can be recovered from the local 
lesions ; it may be assumed that toxins produced elsewhere 
may lead to degenerative changes in the valve and, as a result, 
to the deposition of fibrin from the blood. 

Simple ENDoCitRDixis 

Acute rheumatism accounts for the great majority of cases 
of chronic valvular disease which result from acute endocarditis. 
It is true that sometimes patients with evidence of endocarditis 
are encountered who give no history of either rheumatism or 
chorea, but in such cases it must be remembered that the joint 
manifestations of acute rheumatism in childhood may be 
readily overlooked. Indeed rheumatic carditis is not uncommon 
without obvious joint symptoms. It is possible, however, 
that other infections, particularly scarlet fever or repeated 
attacks of tonsillitis, may produce an endocarditis resembling 
that produced by rheumatic infection. 

In simple endocarditis associated with rheumatic fever 
microscopical examination of the deeper part of the affected 
valves reveals the presence of aggregations of cells similar to 
those described in the cardiac muscle under the term Aschoff’s 
bodies. With the subsidence of the acute infection, the vegeta- 
tions become the seat of a process of slow fibroid change 



ENDOCARDITIS 531 

continuing for many years. This results in the valve segments 
becjoming deformed, producing incompetence or stenosis. 

Symptoms and Signs of Simple Endocarditis. — It has already 
been stated that endocarditis is but one aspect of a carditis, 
and that its presence implies associated myocarditis and 
sometimes pericarditis. It is not surprising, therefore, to find 
that any symptoms due to endocarditis are usually over- 
shadowed by those referable to the inflammation of the heart 
as a whole. In other words, the diagnosis of endocarditis is 
necessarily speculative in the earlier stages of an illness such 
as rheumatic fever, and its occurrence may only be definitely 
proved by the development, at a later stage, of clonic valvular 
disease. Certain physical signs may, however, be present, and 
either prove or suggest the presence of valvular involvement. 
Thus the detection of an early diastolic murmur over the base 
of the heart, or down the sides of the sternum, is definite 
evidence of an aortic valvular lesion. A decision as to involve- 
ment of the mitral valve is not, however, equally easy. It has 
already been pointed out that in many normal persons systolic 
murmurs are frequently heard in the absence of mitral disease. 
A systolic murmur at tlie apex may be produced by a widening 
of the mitral ring resulting from dilatation of the left ventricle, 
such as may occur in any form of myocarditis. It is diflScult 
to distinguish a murmur so produced fi-om one associated with 
the presence of actual vegetations on the valve cusps. Often, 
indeed, the ultimate decision must be left in abeyance until 
the development of other signs of a mitral lesion prove the 
valve cusps to be involved. It is sometimes stated that apical 
systolic murmurs due to simple dilatation of the heart are more 
localised than those due to mitral endocarditis, whereas those 
due to the latter condition are likely to be propagated into the 
axilla. This, however, is not always true. Although, therefore, 
the development of an apical systolic murmur even in the course 
of rheumatic fever cannot be regarded as definite evidence of 
a val^mlar lesion, it must necessarily be viewed with grave 
suspicion, and is an indication for prolonged and complete rest. 

Mitral endocarditis should never be diagnosed on the 
strength of a systolic murmur alone. Enlargement of the 
heart, however, associated with a systolic murmur, strongly 
suggests that the valve has not escaped. An erroneous diagnosis 
of organic heart disease may affect irreparably the well-being 
of the patient, in that exercise and the normal activities of life 
niay be unnecessarily restricted. It must be remembered that 
apical systolic murmurs are often heard in perfectly healthy 
persons. Such murmurs are not necessarily localised to the 



532 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

apex, but may be propagated into the axilla or even heard at 
the angle of the left scapula. Their main characteristic is the 
variation in the murmur which occurs with respiration and 
change in posture ; as a rule,* the murmur tends to become 
weaker or to disappear completely during][expiration, though 
during the inspiratory phase it may be loud and blowing in 
character. 

As simple endocarditis is merely one manifestation of a 
carditis, it calls for no special treatment apart from that 
necessary in any case where inflammation of the heart is 
present. In acute rheumatic endocarditis, embolism is rare, 
though it occurs fi:^quently in chronic valvular disease, 
particularly when auricular fibrillation or subacute bacterial 
endocarditis are present. 

Acute Bacterial Endocarditis 

In this type of endocarditis, vegetations are found upon 
the valves as a result of a general blood infection with varying 
types of organism, such as pneumococci, streptococci, staphy- 
lococci, or gonococci. The involvement of the valves is but 
one feature of a more generalised bacterial invasion of the 
tissues, and is often but a terminal manifestation. In contrast 
to simple or rheumatic endocarditis it is usually easy to isolate 
micro-organisms from the vegetations after death, and blood 
culture during life is often positive. The size of the vegetations 
varies fi'om minute pin-point elevations along the line of 
closure of the valves to large and friable masses, from which 
emboli may be shed into the blood stream. There may be 
much ulceration and destruction of the affected valves, which 
may be perforated. Abscesses may occur in the heart muscle 
adjoining the vegetations. Frequently, the presence of such 
an endocarditis is unsuspected until the valves are examined 
after death, but sometimes, when the vegetations become large, 
there may be evidence of their presence in the development 
of valvular murmurs or embolic phenomena. As a rule the 
mitral and aortic valves are chiefly affected. Unlike simple 
endocarditis, the acute bacterial type shows no tendency 
towards fibrosis or healing. It is therefore primarily of patho- 
logical rather than clinical interest, as the patients rarely 
survive for more than a few weeks. The clinical picture is 
that of a pyaemia, and the endocarditis is usually a complica- 
tion of osteomyelitis, pneumonia, multiple abscesses, or sup- 
purative arthritis. Fortunately the condition is relatively 
uncommon. 



ENDOCARDITIS 


533 


Subacute Bacterial Endocarditis 

This type of endocarditis is practically confined to patients 
with a pre-existing valvular lesion, which may be sometimes 
congenital or more commonly rheumatic. Even such a slight 
abnormality as a bicuspid aortic valve may predispose to 
subsequent infection. The clinical features and course are 
extremely variable. In its most frequent form the illness starts 
as a general malaise with slight fever, often thought to be 
influenza. The temperature fails to subside, but examination 
may reveal nothing beyond a valvular lesion known to have 
been present for many years. The complexion is sallow, and 
there is an anaemia of microcytic ty^pe with a moderate leuco- 
cytosis. Night sweats are firequent, and there is often a slight 
loss of weight. Petechial haemorrhages may usually be seen 
at some stage of the disease occurring spontaneously in the 
skin and mucous membranes. A blood culture at this stage 
may produce a growth of Streptococcus viridans, or the cultiva- 
tion may be negative at the first attempt, though ultimately 
positive cultures can nearly always be obtained. After a 
variable period, symptoms of embolism occur ; in some cases 
there is pain in the extremity of a finger or toe, accompanied 
by redness and swelling, indicating the blocking of an arteriole 
by an embolus ; similar indurated and tender areas occurring 
in the skin are known as Osier’s nodes. The spleen becomes 
palpable, and there may be abdominal pain due to perisplenitis 
over a splenic infarct. Albuminuria or haematuria indicate 
either embolic nephritis or infarction of the kidneys. A some- 
what rare occurrence is embolism of the central artery of the 
retina, which produces sudden and complete bUndness in the 
affected eye. Examination shows pallor of the fundus with a 
bright cherry -red spot at the macula. Embolism of mesenteric 
vessels may produce acute abdominal symptoms. The pyrexia 
continues, though occasionally for a few days it may be absent, 
usually without obvious improvement in the general condition. 
The fingers sometimes become clubbed. The heart may show 
but httle change until the disease has lasted many months, 
but ultimately there is some enlargement, and perhaps a change 
in the character of the murmurs, or evidence of the involve- 
ment of a valve previously thought to be unaffected. After a 
variable period, usually not less than six or more than twelve 
months, death occurs, sometimes from heart failure and ex- 
haustion, sometimes as the result of ursemia due to an acute 
focal nephritis, or sometimes from cerebral embohsm. 

Less typical forms of the disease than that described above 



634 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

may lead to great difficulty in diagnosis. In some cases the 
onset is relatively acute, and the clinical features of the case 
may suggest typhoid fever ; in others the disease may be 
almost latent, with but slight and occasional pyrexia. Even 
in some seemingly mild cases, blood culture often reveals the 
presence of the Streptococcus viridana. This organism is of low 
virulence, and in spite of the fact that infected emboli are being 
discharged into the arterial circulation in large numbers, 
suppuration does not occur. 

The signs and symptoms of subacute bacterial endocarditis 
are dependent on two main factors, the septicaemia and the 
embolic phenomena. The character of the disease depends in 
part upon the virulence of the infection and the extent and 
localisation of the infarcted areas. Among the 8}unptomB 
resulting from the septicaemia are padlor and amaemia, pyrexia, 
and splenic enlargement, while the embolic side of the diseaise 
gives rise to a number of focal lesions, both in the skin and 
viscera. Libman lays great stress on the importamoe in 
diagnosis of petechiaj in the skin and conjunctivas and a brownish 
pigmentation of the face, which is common in the later stages 
of the disease. He hais also shown that in a certain proportion 
of caises bacteria disappear from the blood. Such a condition 
he terms the bacteria-free stage. Unfortimately, however, 
the transition to this stage does not mean that the patient 
necessarily recovers, as the damage wrought by emboli remains 
and frequently results in death from uraemia due to focal 
glomerular nephritis. Attempts at healing often produce still 
further aggravation of the old valvular lesions, with resulting 
myocardial failure. Very occasionally the acute condition 
may subside, and the patient regains apparent health, though 
relapse is liable to occur. It is remarkable how seldom 
fibrillation and subacute bacterial endocarditis occur in the 
same patient. 

In subacute bacterial endocarditis the vegetations are most 
often confined to the mitral and aortic valves, and destruction 
of the valve by ulceration is a less prominent feature than in 
acute infective endocarditis. The vegetations are relatively 
firm and often greenish in colour ; they involve not only the 
valve cusps but also the mural endocardium and the chordss 
tendinese, which may rupture. 

The pathological changes found in other organs will vary 
with the extent and size of the infarcts produced. The spleen 
is large, and may show infarcts and perisplenitis. The livra 
may be nutmeg in type from a terminal cardiac ftdlure. The 
kidneys are the site of small multiple emboli, producing on 



CHRONIC VALVULAR DISEASE 


535 


the surface beneath the capsule minute haemorrhagic points, 
which have given rise to the name “ flea-bitten kidney.*’ 
On microscopical examination there is a focal glomendar 
nephritis. In the brain there may be areas of softening due 
to emboli. 

Differential Diagnosis. — Differentiation from continued 
fevers such as typhoid, obscure forms of tuberculosis, and 
suppuration is not always easy, but a diagnosis of subacute 
bacterial endocarditis is strongly suggested by intermittent 
haematuria, petechial haemorrhages, variable valvular murmurs, 
splenic enlargement, and progressive anaemia. Blood cultures 
should be frequently repeated. A single negative culture does 
not exclude the di^ase, and ultimately a positive culture is 
almost always obtained if the patient is really suffering from 
endocarditis of this type. 

Treatment. — No form of treatment appears to have any 
beneficial effect, and as a rule the patient steadily deteriorates 
whatever is done. Anti-streptococcal serum and vaccines are 
useless, and the intravenous administration of antiseptics such 
as eusol or mercurochrome seldom have any effect beyond 
adding to the patient’s discomfort. Treatment with heparin is 
of no value. The only hope of recovery appears to lie in the 
patient’s own resistance to the infection, and plenty of open air 
and sunshine probably do more to help him than any drugs. 
If the anaemia is severe, some benefit may be derived from 
blood transfusions. Sulphonamides were disappointing when 
first tried, but with more thorough treatment have recently 
proved helpful in a proportion of cases. 


CHRONIC VALVULAR DISEASE 

It has already been pointed out that rheumatic endo- 
carditis in a majority of cases leads to chronic valvular deformity. 
Although acute rheumatism and chorea are by far the most 
common causes of chronic valvular disease, the condition may, 
perhaps, also result from scarlet fever. Syphilis is an important 
cause of aortic disease appearing in middle life, but this results 
from degenerative changes in the aorta spreading to the valve 
rather than from a syphilitic process arising primarily in the 
valve itself. 

Before passing to a consideration of the effects produced 
by lesions of the various valves, it is necessary to lay stress 
upon the fact that valvular lesions in themselves do not produce 
any very prominent symptoms ; the development of symptoms 



530 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

in valvular disease indicates that the myocardium is unable to 
carry on its work efficiently. Such insufficiency results in part 
from the fact that in the presence of valvular disease the heart 
is working at a mechanical disadvantage, but in the main it is 
due to slowly progressive changes in a myocardium previously 
damaged at the time of the original infection. In other words, 
cardiac failure in valvular disease is ultimately due to a defective 
myocardium rather than to valvular damage. Conversely, if 
the cardiac muscle remains efficient, even severe and multiple 
valvular lesions may be compatible with normal health. 

If syphilitic aortic disease be excluded, the mitral valve is 
affected in chronic heart disease far more frequently than any 
other. Indeed, in rheumatic heart disease it is doubtful 
whether the mitral ever escapes completely, though, obviously, 
there may be considerable variation in the degree to which 
it is affected. In a series of ninety-seven autopsies in cases of 
rheumatic fever collected by Carey Coombs, the mitral valve 
was diseased in every case, the aortic in fifty-seven, and the 
tricuspid in thirty-five. Minor degrees of mitral disease may, 
however, give rise to no definite physical signs, and in practice 
it i.'> relatively common to detect aortic disease, without obvious 
mitral involvement, in patients whose valvular disease is 
undoubtedly rheumatic in origin. Disease of the pulmonary 
valve is rare except in congenital heart disease. The tricuspid 
valve alone is never the seat of a chronic endocarditis, but 
tricuspid disease is fairly frequently associated with rheumatic 
lesions of the mitral and aortic valves. 

It has been already pointed out that if the myocardium 
is soimd, no symptoms result from a valvular lesion, and 
often the subjects of chronic valvular disease live out their 
normal span of life until cut off by some intercurrent disease 
unconnected with the heart. Unfortunately, however, this is 
the exception rather than the rule, and most patients with a 
chronic valvular lesion ultimately show signs of cardiac failure, 
which may follow one or more of three main types : congestive 
cardiac failure, mfective endocarditis, and the anginal 83 m(irome, 
the first being by far the most common. 

Mitral Disease 

The mitral valve is affected by chronic valvular disease 
fi^ more frequently than any other valve. Although mitral 
disease is mu^y described under the headings of regurgitation 
and stenosis, it is very doubtful whether these two prooesses 
are not always concurrent, but in the more severe and chronic 



CHRONIC VALVULAR DISEASE 537 

cajses, stenosis is the predominating clinical feature. The 
diagnosis of pure mitral regurgitation as distinct from stenosis 
is fidways a matter of doubt, owing to the frequency of systolic 
murmurs at the apex, apart from mitral disease. 

Mitral disease is so commonly due to rheumatic fever or 
chorea that the number of persons suffering from mitral 
disease is an index of the amount of acute rheumatic infection 
in any given community. Fully developed mitral stenosis is 
unusual before puberty, and, on the whole, females are more 
frequently affected than males. The majority of patients are 
between the ages of fifteen and forty-five, and many fail to 
survive the latter age. 

Morbid Anatomy of Mitral Disease. — At autopsy there is 
a stenosis of the valve accompanied by more or less incom- 
petence. On naked-eye inspection, the heart in an advanced 
case of stenosis has a most striking appearance, owing to the 
relatively small size of the left ventricle as compared with 
the great dilatation of the left auricle and of the right side of 
the heart. The dilatation and hypertrophy of the right ventricle 
and left auricle might reasonably be expected, as the narrowing 
of the mitral valve offers obstruction to the flow of blood 
from the right side of the heart to the left. The left auricle 
is often enormously dilated and, although hypertrophy of the 
muscular wall is not obvious at first sight, comparison of 
the thickness of the wall with that of a normal auricle shows 
there is considerable hypertrophy. The dilatation of the right 
side of the heart is very obvious, and, in consequence, even 
in the absence of tricuspid disease, this valve is widened and 
incompetent. Thrombi may be present in the auricles (atria), 
more particularly in the auricular appendices (auricles) ; these 
are usually adherent to the walls, but occasionally a large 
circular thrombus may lie free in the auricle and act as a 
ball valve. 

The cusps of the mitral ring are thickened and often partially 
fused as the result of a chronic fibroid infiltration ; sometimes 
there is actual calcification ; the chordae tendineae are 
shortened, thickened, and partially fused. Viewed from the 
auricular side, the mitral valve often shows a funnel-shaped 
orifice which wdll not admit the tip of a finger ; sometimes 
the valve resembles a diaphrakgm separating the ventricle 
from the auricle, and the opening is reduced to a mere button- 
hole slit. Recurrences of acute endocarditis often occur on 
valves already scarred by chronic endocarditis, and in such 
a case, in addition to the valvular deformities described above, 
there may be lines of recent vegetations. From an inspection 



638 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

of mitral valves aflFected by stenosis, it is often obvious that 
complete closure of the valve is an impossibility. In such 
cases although stenosis must have been accompanied by 
regurgitation, yet frequently no systolic murmur was present 
during life. 

Physical Signs of Mitral Disease. — The fallacy of assuming 
that every apical systolic murmur represents an organic mitral 
incompetence has already been stressed. Mitral incompetence, 
apart from stenosis, should be diagnosed only in cases with 
cardiac enlargement, a history of rheumatism or chorea and 
a harsh blowing systolic murmur best audible at the apex 
and propagated towards the axilla, such a murmur being often 
accompanied by a systolic thrill. It may also occur in elderly 
patients with enlarged hearts and atheromatous changes. 

In uncomplicated mitral stenosis there may be little or no 
enlargement of the heart to the left, as judged by the position 
of the apex beat or the cardiac dullness. The latter is, 
however, usually increased to the right of the sternum, 
particularly if there is congestive failure. On palpation, a 
diastolic thrill may often be felt over the apex, and on ausculta- 
tion in such cases there is a diastolic murmur, often termed 
presystolic,* crescendo in character, which leads up to a 
markedly accentuated and abrupt first sound. This iastolic 
murmur is localised, and most commonly situated slightly 
internal to the apex beat. A systoUc murmur may be present 
in addition, is wider in its distribution, and best heard over the 
apex and towards the axilla. The murmur of mitral stenosis is 
usually more obvious if the patient is exercised and then 
auscultated while Ijdng on the left side. 

Often in mitral stenosis no presystolic thrill or murmur is 
present, but during diastole there is a long rumbling diastolic 
murmur, best heard at the apex, but without the crescendo 
character of the presystolic bruit. Such a murmur, often termed 
mid-diastolic, is commonly heard in patients with mitral 
stenosis when there is auricular fibrillation. 

In mitral stenosis, whether there is a presystolic or a more 
prolonged diastolic murmur, the second soimd at the pulmonary 
area is accentuated or sometimes reduplicated, presumably 
owing to an increased pressure in the pulmonary artery. 

llie murmurs in mitral stenosis are somewhat inconstant 

* The terms presystolic ** and *'late diastolic'* refer to the fraction of 
diastole that immediately precedes the commoncomont of the first soimd, 
the boginning of ventricular S3rstole, and are more or less synonymous. The 

term aurio^^systoUc ** is also sometimes used in a similar sense, in that 
at^icular systole normally occurs immediately before the commenoeis<^nt of tl^c 
first sound. 



CHRONIC VALVULAR DISEASE 


539 


and may vary in character with change of posture or rate 
of heart beat. In every case, however, the murmxir remains 
diastolic in time, whether best heard late in diastole (pre- 
systohc) or more accentuated during mid-diastole. With rapid 
heart action the murmur extends through the whole of diastole. 
When auricular fibrillation supervenes, the murmur loses its 
presystohc accentuation. DiastoUc murmurs due to mitral 
stenosis are frequently though not invariably accompanied by 
a thrill, which is best felt over the apex impulse with the 
patient on his left side. It is important to remember that 
simple accentuation of the first sound at the apex does not 
indicate mitral stenosis, as it may occur in any heart which 
is beating rapidly and forcibly. 

Symptoms ol Mitral Stenosis. — ^No specific sjmptoms are 
associated with mitral stenosis unless the heart muscle is 
failing. Should this ocoiur, the clinical picture, described under 
the heading of congestive cardiac failure {vide p. 558), will 
be present. Although patients, even with a considerable degree 
of stenosis, may live for many years with but httle impairment 
of activity, they are usually considerably under-developed, and 
even in the absence of failure may show a characteristic malar 
flush. In congestive failure due to mitral stenosis, haemoptysis 
is common. Most often it is due to a pulmonary infarct or to 
pulmonary congestion and faUnre, but it may also sometimes 
occur without evidence of failure. 

Prognosis. — The ultimate outlook is always bad in cases 
of developed mitral stenosis, sis the fibroid change in the valve 
usually progresses steadily, even if slowly. If the patient 
succeeds in surviving to middle life, the degenerative changes 
in the heart muscle smd arteries, which tend to occur after 
the age of fifty, throw cm increased burden on an already 
damaged heart, and cardicM: breakdown is likely to result. 
More often the cardiac muscle begins to feel the strain at a 
far earlier age, cmd in a majority of patients the onset of 
auricular fibrillation leads to a condition of complete or semi- 
invalidism. Even so, with adequate care and treatment life 
may be maintained for many years. 

Aobtio Valvttlab Diskasb 

Whereeui chronic disease of the mitral vcdve is predomincmtly 
rhetunatio in origin, this is not true of aortic vcdvular disease, 
in which syphilis is almost as important a fiactor cus acute 
rheumatism. In addition, in later Itfe disease of the aorta and 
its valve may result from arteriosclerotio cmd degenerative 



640 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

changes alone. As a general rule it may be said that aortic 
disease, unaccompanied by a mitral lesion and occurring 
between the ages of forty and sixty, is predominantly syphilitic. 
Rheumatic disease of the Aortic valves, on the other hand, is 
common in early life, and, in a majority of cases, is complicated 
with mitral disease, though this may be slight. Syphilis involv- 
ing the aorta and the aortic valves is dealt with elsewhere 
{vide p. 584). Very rarely, rupture of an aortic cusp takes 
place as the result of a blow on the chest or a sudden strain. 
When this occurs, the patient may be conscious of something 
in his chest having given way, and the signs of aortic 
regurgitation are found to be present. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The cusps of the aortic valve are 
thickened and less flexible than normal ; fusion between 
adjacent cusps may occur, and nodular vegetations which may 
be hard and even calcified, prevent satisfactory closure of the 
valve. Sometimes the thickening and rigidity lead to narrowing 
of the lumen. As a result of the leakage of blood through the 
aortic valve, additional work is throwm upon the left ventricle, 
which becomes dilated and h 3 rpertrophied. 

In syphilitic cases the valve may be greatly shortened and 
almost appear eaten away as the syphilitic process here is very 
destructive. There is not the same tendency to generalised 
fibrosis and calcification so stenosis is never produced. 

Physical Signs of Aortic Valvular Disease. — Lesions of the 
aortic valve may result either in regurgitation or stenosis or both. 
The physical signs will depend upon the type of defect present. 

Aortic Regurgitation. — The physical signs are usually quite 
definite. The apex beat is unduly forcible and usually well 
to the left of its normal site. Over the base of the heart and 
often dow n both sides of the sternum there is an early diastolic 
murmur, blow ing in character, which often replaces the second 
sound. The bruit may be very faint and heard only when 
the chest is examined in a quiet room. Although an aortic 
regurgitant murmur is usually best heard over the aortic area, 
sometimes it may only be audible lower down the right or 
left border of the sternum. In addition there is often a systolic 
murmur over the base, when it is described as a to-and-fro 
murmur. 

In addition to the early diastolic murmur described above, 
in some cases there is also a piesystolic or rumbling mid- 
diastolic murmur at the apex, which resembles the murmur 
of mitral stenosis. This is termed an Austin Flint murmur. Its 
origin is doubtful, but it may be due to a relative stenosis of 
the mitral valve in comparison vrith the dilatation of the left 



CHRONIC VALVULAR LISEASR 541 

ventride, which has taken place owing to the aortic lesion. 
There is often considerable iflSculty in deciding whether such 
a murmur is a Flint murmur or an indication of concomitant 
mitral stenosis. A history of rheumatic fever, enlargement 
of the heart to the right, and the age of the patient are important. 
If the aortic disease is syphilitic in origin the mitral valve will 
not be involved, whereas with a rheumatic aortic lesion the 
mitral valve is almost invariably the site of concurrent endo- 
carditis, though it may be slight and of no clinical importance. 

Apart from the examination of the heart, other signs may 
point to aortic regurgitation. The most important of these 
is a quickly rising and rapidly collapsing character in the 
pulse, which is known as the Corrigan or ‘‘ vxiter -hammer ’’ pulse. 
Visible capillary pulsation occurs, and may be demonstrated 
most readily by pressing a glass slide upon the mucous 
membrane of the lip, when alternate flushing and pallor are 
observed corresponchng to each systole and diastole. When 
aortic regurgitation is severe, marked arterial pulsation is 
visible in the neck and in all subcutaneous arteries. The 
systolic pressure is high and the diastolic low, with a resultant 
high pulse pressure. A record of the pulse pressure is very 
useful for watching if any increase of the incompetence develops. 
When the incompetence is only slight, so that very little blood 
regurgitates back into the ventricle, there may be little or no fall 
in the diastolic pressure, although a diastolic murmur is audible. 

Aortic Stenosis. — \^en the aortic valve obstructs the 
outflow of blood from the ventricle, the latter hypertrophies, 
partly in an attempt to overcome the obstruction, and partly 
as a result of myocardial involvement. A systolic thrill is felt 
over the aortic area and there is a very loud harsh murmur, 
blowing in character, best heard over the base and propagated 
upwards towards the neck. Usually an early diastolic bruit 
indicates coincident regurgitation. With advanced aortic 
stenosis, which is rare, the heart rate may be slo^v and tlie 
pulse slowly rising in character. Aortic stenosis should never 
be diagnosed in the absence of a thrill, but this must be searched 
for carefully with the patient in the erect position when there 
is a rough harsh systolic murmur. In rheumatic cases the 
heart is usually much enlarged. 

Symptoms. — Aortic disease of rheiunatic origin is latent as 
regards symptoms more often than any other organic heart 
lesion. It is not at all uncommon to find patients who have 
had well-marked aortic disease for many years with no 
impairment of health or activity. In the syphilitic cases, 
however, there is nearly always evidence of associated 



542 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

myocardial involvement, usually accompanied by pain {vide 
p. 585). In aortic disease of rheumatic origin, failure of the 
congestive t3rpe may eventually supervene, ^ough this is less 
common than in mitral stenosis. When failure occurs in aortic 
disease, attacks of vertigo and sudden syncope are common, 
and pain in the chest is more frequent than in mitral disease. 
Troublesome throbbing in the neck, and headache also occur, 
which may interfere with sleep. In the later stages of failure 
due to aortic regurgitation, mental sjnnptoms such as delusions 
and hallucinations are often present. 

The bad prognosis which, until recent years, was usually 
given in aortic regurgitation, was the result of a failure to 
differentiate between the aortic lesions due to rheumatism and 
those occurring as sequelae of syphilis and arteriosclerosis. In 
the rheumatic type the outlook is relatively good, and in the 
absence of severe carditis or further recurrent attacks of 
rheumatic fever the patient may live in fairly good health 
for twenty or even for forty years. In syphilitic aortic disease 
the outlook is much more serious. If the diagnosis is made 
early by symptoms such as palpitation, or even by slight 
anginal pain, vigorous treatment with arsenicals may help to 
prolong life for five years or more. But if the patient has 
already signs of congestive or left ventricular failure, anti- 
syphilitic treatment may do harm and w ill never do good, and the 
average duration of life is less than two years. Sudden death is a 
grave risk. With aortic incompetence due to infective endo- 
carditis or atherosclerosis the outlook depends more on the general 
condition of the patient than on the local disease of the heart. 

Chronic Valvular Disease op Tricuspid and 
Pulmonary Valves 

Except in congenital heart disease and infective endo- 
carditis, the pulmonary valve is rarely affected. In severe 
mitral stenosis with right-sided dilatotion, there may be 
regurgitation through the pulmonary valve as a result of 
stretching of the valve ring. In such cases an early diastolic 
murmur, known as a Graham Steell murmur, is heard along 
the left border of the sternum, and is indistinguishable from 
that of aortic disease. The diagnosis rests upon the site of the 
murmur and the absence of other evidence of aortic regurgita- 
tion, but in actual practice it is often found that a murmur, 
thought to be pulmonary in origin, eventually turns out to be 
aortic. Pulmonary stenosis is discussed in its relation to 
congenital heart disease {vide p. 573). 



CHRONIC DISEASE OF HEART MUSCLE 643 


Although less liable to chronic endocarditis than the 
mitral or aortic, the tricuspid valve is by no means immune. 
It is, however, excessively rare to find the tricuspid involved 
apart from disease on the left side of the heart. Incompetence 
is common in the later stages of congestive failure, but stenosis 
is relatively rare. The latter is evidenced by a diastohc bruit 
heard near the lower end of the sternum, but care must be 
taken not to confuse it with a mitral murmur. A pulsating 
liver is a valuable sign of tricuspid disease. 


CHRONIC DISEASE OF THE HEART MUSCLE 
(Myocardial Degeneration) 

Death very commonly occurs as the result of progressive 
circulatory failure. In the majority of such cases autopsy 
reveals well-marked evidence of disease ; in an appreciable 
percentage, however, there is no naked -eye or histological 
evidence of abnormality. This is frequently the case in patients 
dying of tuberculosis, Graves’s disease, or cachexia of varying 
origin. A diagnosis of myocardial degeneration, a term imply- 
ing visible histological alteration, can thus only be arrived at 
with certainty after death. At the bedside, therefore, it is 
better to speak of myocardial insufficiency rather than of 
myocardial degeneration. 

iEtiology. — The following factors are so fi’equently part of 
the clinical picture of chronic myocardial degeneration that 
they may safely be regarded as predisposing causes : — 

1. Arteriosclerosis and senile changes in the blood vessels, 

with or without a high blood pressure. 

2. Chronic nephritis, 

3. Chronic pulmonary . disease, e.g,, emphysema, bronchi- 

ectasis, chronic bronchitis, 

4. Any rheumatic disease of the heart. 

6. Hypo- and hyper-thyroidism. 

6. Certain poisons, e.gr., phosphorus, chloroform, lead. 

7. Hypovitaminosis, especially of the vitamin B group. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^Myocardial damage may taJj:e one of 
the following forms : — 

(a) Clomly Swelling ^ — This is characterised by unusual soft- 
ness and pallor of the ventricular muscle, which may be pinkish 
in colour and is friable to the touch. Microscopically the fibres 
are swollen and granular. Cloudy swelling is common after pi*o- 
longed pyrexia from any cause. Complete recovery takes place. 



544 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCXILAR SYSTEM 

(6) Fatty Infiltration , — By this is meant a pathological 
increase in the fat normally present in the epicardium, with 
an extension or ingrowth .of it into the iinderl3dng muscle, 
which may even be replaced by fat. In an extreme case fat 
appears beneath the endocardium in streaky yellow patches 
extending to the columnas camese (trabeculae cameae). Many 
muscle fibres atrophy and disappear, the survivors forming 
thin strands separating columns of fat. Fatty infiltration occurs 
commonly, though not invariably, in obese persons. 

(c) Fatty Degeneration , — By this is meant the occurrence 
of fatty globules within the muscle fibres. It occurs particularly 
in association with any severe anaemia, such as pernicious 
anaemia, and the leukaemias. It is conspicuous in phosphorus 
and chloroform poisoning. In chronic lung conditions the right 
ventricle may be chiefly affected, otherwise the left usually 
shows the fatty change most markedly. In the anaemias, the 
distribution of fatty changes is patchy, giving rise to a 
characteristic “ thrush breast ’’ appearance or “ tabby-cat ” 
striation in the papillary muscles. Fatty changes usually 
follow in the wake of disease of the coronary arteries. 

{d) Brown Atrophy , — In chronic wasting diseases, such as 
carcinoma or tuberculosis, the heart is often rather smaller than 
normal, and of a brownish tint on section. It may weigh only 
half the normal. The muscle is not only brown but friable, and 
the coronary vessels are tortuous. Microscopically the fibres 
are smaller than usual, and contain a greenish pigment which 
does not give the so-called “ iron reaction.’' This distinguishes 
brown atrophy from the increased pigmentation present in 
haemochromatosis . 

(c) Fibrosis of the Myocardium , — By this is meant an over- 
growth of connective tissue in the heart walls. It may occur 
in localised patches or diffusely throughout the organ ; it may 
be obvious to the naked eye or require special methods for 
detection. Fibrosis is invariably a sequel to previous damage 
brought about in various ways : (1) occlusion or narrowing 
of the coronary arteries and their branches ; (2) acute inflam- 
mation of the endo- or peri-cardium extending into the heart 
muscle ; (3) syphilitic disease ; (4) tuberculous infection 

(very rarely). Narrowing or complete occlusion of the coronary 
vessels may occur near the origin of the main arteries at the 
aorta, or distally and diffusely in the smaller ramifications. 
In the former event a large area of muscle will be infarcted and 
gradually replaced by fibrous tissue if life continue. With 
occlusion of numerous small branches there will be multiple 
regions of fibrosis. The clinical picture depends on the rate of 



CHRONIC DISEASE OF HEART MUSCLE 545 


onset of complete and continued occlusion, and on the size of 
the vessel concerned {vide p. 553). In embolism the cessation 
of blood supply is practically instantaneous ; in thrombosis, 
resulting from arteriosclerotic changes and long-continued 
narrowing, it is more gradual. In the latter circumstances some 
slight anastomosis develops with branches of vessels not in- 
volved, and the final closure is not attended by such marked or 
serious consequences as occur in sudden embolism. Arterio- 
sclerotic changes in the left coronary artery and its branches lead 
to fibrosis of the left ventricle, at its apex particularly. The 
muscle wall becomes thin, pale, and stiffened. Thrombotic 
material is liable to collect in the ventricular cavities over the 
region affected. The fibrosis and thinning of the heart wall 
occasionally leads to sudden rupture or aneurysm formation. 
Rupture is particularly liable to occur after complete occlusion, 
before the soft infarct has had time to be replaced by fibrous 
tissue. In inflammatory disease of the endocardium or peri- 
cardium, the myocardium is always invaded as well. jiUong 
with sclerosis of the valves and fibrous changes in the peri- 
cardium, connective tissue increases in the heart muscle itself. 
When the septum is involved, interference with the bundle of His 
may lead to heart block. Sypliilis of the myocardium occurs in 
the form of a few large gummata or many small ones diffusely 
scattered ; the septae are frequently involved, and heart block is 
common. In congenital sj^phiiis the myocardium may be filled 
with spirochaetes and yet no fibrosis be found. On the other 
hand, there may be a general diffuse increase in connective tissue, 
as in the liver, lungs, and other organs. It is remarkable how 
immune the heart muscle appears to be in miliary tuberculosis, 
though tuberculosis of the myocardium has been described. 

Symptomatology. — The clinical manifestations of chronic 
myocardial degeneration all result from insufficiency of the 
cardiac muscle. They vary widely in different individuals, 
but may be described under tliree main headings : — 

Cardiac Enlargement, — This is nearly always present, but to 
detect the enlargement special X-ray methods may be necessary. 
The brown atrophy of senile hearts is the outstanding exception, 
and angina pectoris often occurs with httle or no enlargement 
of the heart. 

Circulatory Failure. — In the early stages a persistently 
low exercise tolerance may be the only evidence of disease. 
Slight exertion, such as hurrying on the level or walking 
up an incline, produces imdue respiratory distress or even 
precordial pain. Later, in the absence of some sudden terminal 
event, congestive cardiac failure supervenes. 

35 



646 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

Special Symptoms avd Signs , — ^Any of the arrh3rthmias, and 
particularly extra-sy stolen, may occur. Heart block may be 
foimd. Although sensory symptoms are by no means invariable, 
pain beneath the sternum, or less significantly over the apex, 
in the epigastrium, or radiating down the inner aspect of one 
or other arm is extremely common {vide p. 549). Dyspepsia 
and flatulence, headache, attacks of faintness or (iiz25iness, 
are frequent. The memory often fails, and all grades of mental 
disorder may be observed. The character of the heart sounds 
will depend on the condition of the ventricular muscle. In 
tlie absence of valvular disease it is not uncommon to find 
the first and second sounds altered in quality, but there 
is no characteristic change. Frequently the sounds are feeble 
and rapid, the so-called “ tic-tac ” rhythm. Occasionally 
reduplication of the first and second sound produces the 
so-called gallop rhythm ; this always indicates a grave 
prognosis and is often found with cardio-renal disease. 

The Heart in Myxcedema. — In myxoedema and cretinism, 
the capacity of the heart to perform work is often diminished. 
The important characteristics of the myxccdema heart are 
enlargement, a sluggish cardiac action, and electrocardiographic 
changes. The enlargement of the heart involves all chambers 
and may be of great degree. The most noteworthy feature 
of the enlargement is that it diminishes when thyroid extract 
is administered. The cause of the enlargement is not at 
present clear, but is probably due to dilatation as a specific 
result of thyroid deficiencj% in that in the absence of thjToid 
hormone the capacity for work of the heart is diminished. 
In some cases an associated anaemia is a contributory factor. 

The sluggish cardiac action is revealed by a slow circulation 
time, small cardiac contractions as shown by fluoroscopic 
examination, and the presence of distant heart sounds. The 
chief electrocardiographic changes are a diminished voltage of 
the P and QRS waves in all leads. The T waves may be low, 
flat, or inverted. The waves return to normal amplitude as a 
result of thyroid treatment. 

It is noteworthy that congestive cardiac failure only occurs 
in a smaU percentage of cases with myxcedema heart. This is 
apparently due to the fact that as the energy requirements of the 
body in hypothyroid states are so diminished, the sluggish, 
enlarged heart can deal with them adequately. Indeed, when 
congestive cardiac failure in myxoedematous patients does occur, 
there is not infrequently an associated arteriosclerosis. In those 
rare uistances where the failure is essentially a myxoedematous 
one, the condition is benefited by thyroid treatment. 



HEART FAILURE 


547 


Deficiency oi Vitamin Bj. — ^In diseases due to deficiency of 
certain members of the vitamin B group, such as occurs in 
beri-beri, pathological changes can be observed in the heart. 
This deficiency may occur in heavy beer drinkers. Histologi- 
cally, there occurs hydropic degeneration of the myocardial 
fibres with a perivascular oedema. These changes, however, are 
not of regular occurrence, and may be found in conditions other 
than beri-beri. Clinically, there is enlargement of the heart, 
involving particularly the right side, and cardiac failure with 
congestion frequently follows. 

At autopsy, hypertrophy and dilatation of all the chambers 
are found. Adequate treatment with vitamin Bi produces 
beneficial results, with a diminution in the size of the heart. 
Digitalis therapy has no such effect. 

Clinically, this type of myocardial degeneration is usually 
associated with peripheral neuritis, but in some cases there is 
only a history of dietary insufficiency of vitamin B-containing 
foods. 

Cases of pellagra frequently show symptoms and signs 
of cardio-vascular damage, and it is probable that this 
is due to the association of a vitamin B^ deficiency in this 
disease. 

In human sciuvy, changes in the myocardium have been 
described. It is not clear that ^dtamin C deficiency is responsible, 
for there is usually present a multiple vitamin deficiency and 
the cardiac lesions may be due to the lack of vitamin Bj. 
Vitamin C is low in rheumatic fever, but its administration has 
no effect on the clinical course of the condition and does not 
reduce the incidence of recurrences. 


HEART FAILURE 

Apart from special cases such as Stokes-Adams attacks in 
heart block the heart generally fails in one of three main ways : 
(1) Anginal failure with the special syndrome or subdivision 
of cardiac infarction, (2) congestive failure or right ventricular 
failure, or (3) left ventricular failure, showing itself by 
paroxysmal dyspnoea, cardiac asthma, or acute pulmonary 
oedema. It is true that failure of the left ventricle is often 
followed quickly or more slowly by failure of the right or vice 
versa, but the two syndromes can be distinguished and are 
important both for treatment and prognosis. These three 
forms will now be disoussed. Peripheral circulatory failure is 
dealt with on page 567, 



548 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 


THE AJ^GINAL SYNDROME 

The term angina, as applied to cardio-vascxilar symptoms, 
indicates paroxysmal discomfort or pain referred to the sub- 
stemum or precordium. It is important to realise that angina 
pectoris is a symptom complex rather than a disease, and that 
it may occur in a number of pathological conditions, not 
necessarily closely related to one another, either as regards the 
site or type of the pathological lesion. For example, anginal 
symptoms may occur with coronary sclerosis, with syphilitic 
disease involving the openings of the coronaries, occasionally 
with rheumatic disease of the aortic valves, or with severe 
ansemia, whatever its cause. In all these conditions there is 
a deficient blood supply through the coronary arteries. 

Angina may be regarded as a t}T)e of cardiac failure which 
is specially prone to occur with the chronic and degenerative 
changes which involve the heart and aorta after middle life. 
It is of interest to note that anginal pain is uncommon in 
congestive cardiac failure. If this type of failure becomes 
established in a patient who has previously been subject to 
angina, the attacks usually cease although cardiac insufficiency 
may be both considerable and progressive. 

Just as angina is the result of varjing pathological condi- 
tions, so also it varies very widely in its severity and clinical 
features. At one end of the scale it may be little more than 
a sense of oppression beneath the sternum which rapidly 
disappears with rest, at the other it may be a pain of such 
intensity and torment that the patient may die in an attack. 
Between these two extremes there is an almost infinite 
gradation of symptoms, the only common factor in which is 
pain or discomfort of short duration felt in the midlino of the 
chest, wherever else it may spread. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Although the anginal syndrome may 
occur in a number of pathological conditions affecting the 
heart or aorta, at autopsy there is always found some degree 
of coronary sclerosis or some obstruction to the mouth of a 
coronary artery that produces some ischaemia of the myo- 
cardium. As a result of this, there is also evidence, naked 
eye or microscopical, of fibroid changes in the heart muscle. 
In some cases death may have occurred as the result of a 
coronary occlusion with resulting infarction of the heart muscle. 
In addition to the coronary sclerosis there are usually general- 
ised arteriosclerotic changes in other vessels. Sometimes the 
coronary vessels themselves may be reasonably patent, but 



THE ANGINAL SYNDROME 


549 


the presence of arteriosclerotic plaques near their origin in the 
aorta may have obstructed the blood flow. In other cases of 
angina syphilitic aortitis is found {vide p. 584). In the majority 
of cases the heart is found to be enlarged. 

iEtiology. — Angina pectoris, especially in its more severe 
forms, is far more common among males than females. It is 
primarily an afiiiction of the upper classes and is less often seen 
among manual workers. It is most prone to occur in those who 
have been subjected to heavy responsibility and mental strain, 
and it is specially common among medical men. Although 
over-indulgence in food, drink, and tobacco may play a part, 
any factors which tend to produce arteriosclerosis are important. 
Of these, heredity has perhaps the greatest influence. Angina, 
like gout, arteriosclerosis, and cerebral haemorrhage, often tends 
to recur in successive generations of one family. 

Angina is a common feature of syphilitic aortitis, and here 
it may occur even below the age of forty, whereas angina 
due to other causes is increasingly common from forty upwards. 
Very occasionally angina may occur in patients with rheumatic 
aortic disease. Rheumatic mitral lesions, however, are seldom, 
if ever, associated with conspicuous pain, though aching under 
the left breast is not unconunon when the patient is tired or 
overworked. 

The mechanism of the symptom appears to depend upon a 
relative or absolute anoxaemia of the myocardium. Thus 
angina pectoris is found not only in the presence of coronary 
narrowing but may sometime.8 occur in the course of profound 
anaemia or during an attack of paroxysmal tachycardia. 

Symptoms of Angina Pectoris. — In its less severe forms, 
angina is a feeling of oppression or discomfort behind the 
sternum or over the precordial area, and the onset of an attack 
is as a rule definitely related to exercise. A patient subject to 
such attacks may be able to walk in comfort on the level and 
at a reasonable speed, but should he have to hurry, to walk 
uphill or against a strong wind, he develops sternal or precordial 
discomfort or pain, which grows steadily worse if he persists 
with the exertion ; if, however, he stops to rest, the symptoms 
pass off completely in the course of a few minutes. Often the 
symptoms are more severe ; there may be a definite gnawing 
pain over the precordium which may radiate upwards into the 
neck or down the arms, particularly the left arm. Nor are 
the attacks any longer brought on only by exertion. In the 
more fully developed cases of angina the paroxysms may start 
as the result of emotion, anger, or excitement, or they may be 
precipitated by slight external stimuli such as cold, or by an 



550 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

unusually heavy meal. Sometimes, indeed, the unfortunate^ 
sufferer may have severe attacks without any obvious cause, 
even when at rest in b^d. 

In the extreme grades of the malady the patient presents 
a striking clinical picture. The attack begins abruptly with 
excruciating pain in the region of the sternum. It may be 
confined to the sternum or may radiate thence down the 
inner aspect of the left arm, sometimes down both arms, up 
into the neck, or down towards the epigastrium. The chest 
feels as tliough it w^ere gripped in a vice, and there may some- 
times be a sense of impending death, which occasionally is 
justified by the result. These subjective sensations are associ- 
ated with an ashen pallor of the face, holding of the breath, 
and a complete immobility. The sufferer is obviously afraid 
to move or even to breathe. The agony of even a severe attack 
seldom lasts more than a couple of minutes and its duration 
is often a matter of seconds only, though to the patient himself 
it may seem an eternity. He may break into a profuse 
perspiration, and for some time after the attack may be 
strikingly d^spnceic and complain of intense fatigue. If an 
examination can be made during an attack — a rare event — the 
pulse is found to be soft and regular and is seldom increased in 
rate. The blood pressure, however, has been shown to rise before 
the onset and during a paroxysm. Often after the subsidence 
of an attack there may be hyperaesthesia over the precordium 
and sometimes moist sounds at the bases of the lungs. 

Diagnosis.- The diagnosis of angina pectoris may bo one 
of considerable difficulty, particularly when, as often happehs, 
the patient is not seen in an attack. In such a case the history 
of the patient is of the greatest importance. The important 
factors are : — 

1. The site of the pain. This is in most cases substernal 
but may spread dowm one or both arms or to the left side 
of the chest. 

2. Duration of pain, which rarely lasts more than a few 
minutes. Pain lasting over ten minutes is suggestive of coronary 
occlusion (vide p. 553). 

3. Relation to exertion and emotion. Angina, at any 
rate when the attacks first start, follows exertion or sometimes 
emotion. When anginal attacks have l)een present for months 
or years they may occur when the patient is at rest, but as a 
rule rest rapidly abolishes the pain in the so-called angina of 
effort. 

4. Age of the patient. Angina is very rare before forty 
years of age. 



THE ANGINAL SYNDROME 


551 


5. Most patients with angina are unduly dyspnceic on 
exertion and there is, as a rule, evidence clinical, radiological 
or electrocardiographic that the heart is diseased. It is im- 
portant to realise that a normal electrocardiogram in no way 
precludes the presence of angina. 

Perhaps the most significant point in the diagnosis of 
angina is that in this condition the attacks of pain are induced 
by exertion and relieved by rest. It is most often missed 
because the doctor is only familiar with the severe forms and 
does not realise that slight pain or even tightness in the chest 
may be of equal significance. Any substernal or precordial 
pain in a patient of middle age or over, which has these 
characteristics, must be viewed with grave suspicion. In the 
more severe types, where the pain comes on spontaneously, 
there is likely to be confirmatory evidence in the form of 
objective evidence of cardio-vascular disease, and the attacks 
are also likely to be suflBciently typical to justify the diagnosis. 
The differentiation between an anginal attack and coronary 
occlusion is dealt with below {vide p. 556). 

Sab-mammary Pain. — Pain in the precordium and particu- 
larly in the sub-mammary region is not uncommon in patients 
in whom there is no demonstrable cardio-vascular lesion. 
Such pain was in the past often described as pseudo-angina, 
a term which is misleading to the medical man and often 
disastrous for the morale of the patient. It is common among 
the emotionally unstable, and particularly among women at 
the menopause. The pain is usually beneath the left breast 
rather than substernal and is often described as acliing or gnaw- 
ing in character ; it is more prolonged than an attack of angina, 
and is often alleged by the patient to be present continuously 
for long periods. It is not noticeably increased during exertion, 
though it may be aggravated after exertion or by emotion or 
excitement. Symptoms may be brought on by fatigue and 
overwork as well as by anxiety. Often there is striking hyper- 
aesthesia in addition. Unlike angina, such pain is not character- 
ised by immobility and holding of the breath, but rather by 
restlessness and agitation. Often there are in addition other 
evidences of vasomotor or nervous instability, such as cold 
extremities, attacks of migraine, neuralgia, or flushes of heat. 
Sometimes precordial pain or discomfort is associated with the 
immoderate use of tobacco, tea or coffee. 

Pain in the left side of the chest is not uncommonly associ- 
ated with dyspepsia, particularly when there is much gastric 
distension. The patient often complains of “ wind round the 
heart,** and when eructation occurs the discomfort is promptly 



652 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 


relieved. Distension of the stomach with air is a frequent 
occurrence in the reflex dyspepsias resulting from cholecystitis, 
but it often results simply from aerophagy in nervous dyspepsia. 
Correction of the diet, or such drugs as belladonna or alkalis, 
may relieve the symptoms and thus aid in the diagnosis 
from angina pectoris. It must be remembered, however, 
that attacks of angina pectoris may be induced by a heavy 
meal and may be followed by eructation. Amyl nitrite, 
though usually effective in the relief of anginal pain, has 
no effect. 

Vasovagal Attacks , — This term was introduced by Gowers 
in 1907 to describe attacks in w^hich the patient complains of 
various subjective sensations, such as sinking feelings in the 
abdomen, precordial discomfort, difficulty in breathing, a sense 
of impending death but rarely loss of consciousness. Such 
attacks occur mainly in women with nervous instability and 
poor physique. They do not resemble angina pectoris in that 
the symptoms are of long duration, sometimes several hours, 
and pain is not a feature. 

The term vasovagal attack has unfortunately, in recent 
years, been used to include many forms of attack in which the 
patient either feels faint or may actually lose consciousness. 
Such attacks may he precipitated by quite minor causes, such 
as a hypodermic injection or the sight of blood. They are 
probably dependent on cerebral anaemia with slowing of the 
pulse {vide p. 507). 

The vavHovagal attack as described by Gow^ers rarely, if 
ever, occurs in persons wdth heart disease, and the outlook as 
regards life is good, though those subject to attacks often 
become chronic invalids and hypochondriacs. 

Treatment. — Since angina pectoris is an indication of 
cardio-vascular disease, almost certainly progressive, and since 
there is always the possibility of sudden death in the next 
attack, it is important to recommend a regime which excludes 
as far as possible such factors as predispose to an attack. 
Sudden exposure to cold must be avoided ; bed and bedroom 
should be warmed, as contact with cold sheets may precipitate 
an attack. Any exercise which regularly provokes the pain, 
mental strain, and over-indulgence in food, drink, and tobacco 
should be forbidden. Exertion shortly after a meal is to be 
avoided. In the presence of syphilis a preliminary course of 
mercury and iodides must be given before administering 
arsenical compounds {vide p. 588). Under a satisfactory regime 
patients often survive for many years. To the patient’s friends, 
however, it is probably wise to be frank as to the possibility 



CORONARY OCCLUSION 553 

of a fatal attack at any time, though the likelihood of death 
in any particular attack is very small. 

In an attack trinitrin tablets, or gr., chewed and 
placed under the tongue, or inhalation of amyl nitrite — a capsule 
containing 3 minims crushed in a handkerchief will suflBce — 
will usually terminate the attack abruptly, though sometimes 
it may fail. Morphia and atropine in full doses may be neces- 
sary when severe attacks recur at brief intervals, but they 
suggest the possibility of cardiac infarction. Continued 
administration of sodium nitrite to 2 gr.) or of liquor trinitrini 
(1 to 2 minims) are not likely to be effective in diminishing the 
frequency of attacks, but bromides and other sedatives often 
are. Operative measures, such as thyroidectomy or sympa- 
thectomy, have on the whole proved ineffective. 


CORONARY OCCLUSION 
{Cardiac Infarction) 

There is one important clinical sjmdrome associated with 
sudden acute substemal or epigastric pain that deserves a 
special description, namely, that caused by occlusion of a 
coronary vessel. In every case of angina pectoris where the 
pain continues for fifteen minutes or longer, occlusion of a 
coronary vessel must be suspected. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^The coronary arteries do not anastomose 
freely so that the permanent occlusion of a coronary vessel 
often leads to the death of the muscle supplied by it. The 
size of the resulting infarct depends both on the suddenness 
of the closure ahd on the size of the vessel involved. \Mien 
the main coronary vessels are occluded, sudden death, or 
death after a short interval, is the rule. Occlusion of fairly 
large branches is, however, compatible with life, provided it 
occurs gradually. Sudden occlusion even of a small branch 
may be immediately fatal. In the hearts of patients who 
have survived a number of agonising seizures, localised 
patches of fibrosis may be found, suggesting that some of the 
anginal attacks may have been due to the gradual occlusion 
of some small coronary branch. The region deprived of its 
blood supply xmdergoes the morbid changes associated with 
infarction. The presence of necrotic tissue in the heart wall 
gives rise to leucocytosis and pyrexia. If the infarct extends to 
the pericardium, a pericardial thrombus forms. If it extends 
to the endocardium, a mural thrombus develops, portions of 
which may break off to form emboli in the lungs, brain, spleen, 



654 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

kidneys, or elsewhere. If the patient survives, the infarct 
gradually becomes replaced by fibrous tissue with or without 
weakening of the heart wall. Occasionally an aneurysmal 
dilatation with subsequent rupture may occur at the site of a 
previous infarction. 

iEtiology. — The blocking of a coronary vessel is due to 
formation of a thrombus in its lumen. Hence all causes pre- 
disposing to atheroma or arteriosclerosis are of importance, 
such as prolonged high blood pressure, old age, chronic nephritis, 
gout, s>q)hilis, heredity, tobacco, mental worry, over-indulgence 
in food and drink. 

Symptoms. — Coronary thrombosis occurs more often when 
the patient is at rest than when he is active. The onset of 
symptoms is very sudden and the patient is at once seen to be 
gravely ill. The initial symptoms are pain and collapse. The 
pain is usually substemal but it may sometimes radiate into 
the epigastrium. The pulse is thin and rapid and the blood 
pressure often very low. The patient rapidly becomes pale or 
cyanosed. In spite of severe collapse the mind is usually clear. 
Sometimes death may occur within a few hours of the onset. 
The pain persists for hours or even for days, especially if it is 
not controlled by morphia. During the first twenty-four hours 
the temperature is subnormal but later it rises and pyrexia 
may continue for a week or more. At the same time a polymor- 
phonuclear leucocytosis develops. After the pain has passed 
off the patient s main complaint is one of extreme exhaustion. 

On physical examination during the initial stage of shock 
the heart sounds may be barely audible, but r^les are firequently 
heard at the bases of the lungs. After a few days a pericardial 
rub may be detected but this is often very transitory. Occasion- 
ally coronarj^ thrombosis may be accompanied by the sudden 
development of an arrhjiihmia, such as auricular fibrillation 
or heart block. 

If the patient survives for seven days or longer embolic 
phenomena may appear. The emboli are formed from detached 
intraventricular thrombus and they may lodge in the lungs, 
brain, spleen, kidneys, or elsewhere. The risk of embolism 
persists for about four weeks and patients who appear to have 
survived the initial dangers of coronary occlusion may succumb 
to a large embolus, most commonly in the lung. Sometimes life is 
terminated by a second coronary thrombosis within a few weeks. 

Often when the patient survives the initial stage of collapse 
he may gradually develop symptoms of congestive (^krdiac failure 
with pulmonary oedema and anasarca. In such cases he often 
becomes confused and delirious and dies within a few weeks. 



CORONARY OCCLUSION 


555 


Coronary occlusion is frequent among the aged and in such 
cases there may often be little or no precordial pain and few 
characteristic symptoms. 

The electrocardiographic finding a are not constant, but may 
be suggestive. The conspicuous alteration in the electro- 
cardiogram is in the T wave, which is inverted in leads I. or 
III. The T wave in lead II. may also be inverted in conjunction 
with an inverted T either in leads I. or III. The T wave in 



Fia. 16 

Electrocardiograms from a man aged 54 (a) 5 days, {h) 12 days, and (c) 14 weeks 
after a coronary thrombosis. In (a), in lead 111., the portion of the curve 
during the S-T interval is raised above the base line and T is slightly inverted ; 
in (6) T is deeply inverted in leads II. and III. ; in (c) these have returned 
some way towarcis the normal. After the thrombosis the temperature rose to 
102 for 4 days, the wliite count rose to 29,000, and the systolic blood pressure 
fell from 160 to 90 mm. of mercury. 

(From an EUctroeardioffram, by Dr Maurice Campbell.) 


lead III. may be unusually elevated, when in lead I. it is 
inverted and vice versa. Often that portion of the curve 
immediately succeeding the R or S wave tends to become 
raised above or depressed below the base line {vide Fig. 15). 
Cardiac infarction with T I. inversion indicates infarction of 
the anterior portion of the heart, generally of the left ventricle. 
T III, inversion indicates changes in the posterior portion, 
again generally involving the left ventricle and, other things 
being equal, is of less serious significance. Sometimes lead IV., 
which in general features resembles lead I., may show inversion 



566 DISEASES OF THE CAEDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

of the T waves before they have developed or after they have 
disappeared in the other leads. 

As is clear from the preceding description, the condition 
may simulate closely such abdominal emergencies as perforation 
of a peptic ulcer, acute gall-stone colic, and acute haemorrhagic 
pancreatitis. The dyspnoea, pallor, fall in blood pressure, 
and later a pericardial friction rub are perhaps the most reliable 
points of difference in the early stages. In doubtful perforation 
the presence of gas below the diaphragm in an X-ray may clinch 
the diagnosis. 

A coronary thrombosis often produces symptoms which 
are regarded by the patient, and sometimes by his doctor, 
as due to ‘‘acute indigestion.” It is surprising how often 
the word “ agonising ” is used of the pain by sensible 
patients and this should put the doctor on his guard against 
accepting the diagnosis of indigestion. Flatulence may be 
a very prominent symptom. Sudden onset of severe dis- 
comfort, distension or pain in the upper epigastrium, occurring 
in a patient over middle age, must always be regarded with 
suspicion. 

Coronary thrombosis is differentiated from an attack of 
angina pectoris (1) by absence of relation to effort ; (2) 

the relatively long duration of the pain ; (3) symptoms of 
shock. 

Prognosis. — Coronary occlusion is probably the commonest 
cause of sudden death. Many of its victims die within a few 
days but there is no malady in which it is so difficult ta give a 
definite prognosis. The most desperately ill patients not in- 
frequently confound all prophecies by recovering, while others 
who appear to be doing well may develop cardiac failure or 
rupture of the heart, or may die of an embolism. In general 
it may be said that the younger the patient the better the 
prognosis as regards complete recovery, but even patients over 
seventy maj^ recover and live for many years. 

Treatment. — The most immediate need is to relieve the pain 
by adequate injections of morphia (J to ^ gr.), repeated if 
necessary. The nitrites are not only useless but dangerous as 
they produce a further fall in blood pressure. Absolute rest 
with expert nursing is essential. Under no circumstances 
should the patient be moved after the first few days, as this 
may precipitate embolism. Complete rest in bed for at least 
four weeks is essential even for the mildest cases, and con- 
valescence must be prolonged. Cardiac stimulants such as 
camphor are inatlvisable. If the patient is nervous and over- 
anxious bromide or phenobarbitone is helpful. 



DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 657 


LEFT VENTRICULAR FAILURE 

In essential hypertension {vide p. 678), and indeed in all other 
conditions in which there is prolonged hypertension, and in 
aortic incompetence the left ventricle is enlarged partly by 
dilatation and partly by hypertrophy. Although no symptoms 
may develop for many years eventually, if life is not cut short 
by other causes, such as cerebral haemorrhage, the left ventricle 
begins to fail. The clinical picture thus produced is unlike 
that of right ventricular failure and has been termed by Clifford 
Allbut as “ cardiac defeat.” In his view the heart muscle 
eventually is unable to continue to pump blood at high pressure 
into the arterial circulation. 

Sometimes the first symptom is an insidious dyspnoea but 
not infrequently the first striking manifestations are attacks 
of severe paroxysmal dyspnoea which occur most commonly 
at night. Their resemblance to bronchial asthma has led to 
such attacks being termed cardiac asthma. The onset of an 
attack is sudden ; it often occurs soon after the patient has 
gone to sleep. He awakes with a distressing sensation of 
suffocation and is intensely dyspnceic ; there is, however, no 
anginal pain. He coughs persistently and often brings up 
large amounts of liquid non-purulent and frothy sputum, 
which is sometimes pink with blood (acute pulmonary oedema). 
The attack lasts for about an hour and then suddenly ceases, 
leaving the patient exhausted. If he is examined during an 
attack there are innumerable r&les all over the chest, particularly 
at the bases. The pulmonary second sound is often accentuated, 
indicating that the pressure in the pulmonary circulation is 
relatively high. 

Attacks of cardiac asthma occur in conditions other than 
hypertension, though this is the most common cause. Thus 
they are encounter^ in syphilitic aortitis and aneurysm, more 
rarely in rheumatic aortic disease, in occlusive disease of the 
coronaries and sometimes in carcinoma of a bronchus. 

The mechanism by which an attack of cardiac asthma is 
produced is relative insufficiency of the left ventricular muscle 
as compared with that of the right ventricle. This results in 
an increase of pressure in the pulmonary circulation and 
ultimately in pulmonary cedema. 

Once symptoms of left ventricular failure have developed 
they tend to persist. Attacks of cardiac asthma become more 
frequent and may occur almost every night. There is often, 
though not invariably, a fall in the blood pressure, more marked 



658 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

in the systolic than in the diastolic pressure. As the patient’s 
condition deteriorates symptoms of right-sided failure become 
apparent with a rise in venous pressure and oedema of the 
ankles or lumbar region. Eventually the typical picture of 
congestive cardiac failure may replace that of left ventricular 
failure. 

Treatment of Left Ventricular Failure.^ — For the immediate 
treatment of an attack of cardiac astlima ^ gr. of morphia 
should be given as early as possible. If there is obvious oedema 
of the lungs with numerous rales and frothy sputum a vene- 
section of 20 oz. often gives relief. Adrenalin and ephedrine 
are dangerous. 

When symptoms of left ventricular failure become apparent 
in a hjT^ertensive subject even though they be relatively slight, 
it is important to put the patient at complete rest in bed for 
a month. The rest may give the heart muscle an opportunity 
to recover and the further development of symptoms may be 
postponed for months or ev^en years. When pulmonary oedema 
is present mercurial diuretics (vide p. 560) are of value. If 
auricular fibrillation is present digitalis is essential, but even 
in the absence of fibrillation digitalisation appears to be 
beneficial in a proportion of cases. Cardiac asthma is less 
likely to occur if only a very small evening meal is taken. 


CONGESTIVE CARDIAC FAILURE 

In congestive cardiac failure, inability of the right ventricle 
to maintain the circulation efficiently results in tj^pical patho- 
logical changes in practically all the organs of the lK>dy ; such 
changes are the same whatever the cause of the failure, 
whether associated with valvular disease or due entirely to 
myocardial disease. The treatment of congestive failure is 
the same whatever its origin may be. 

Morbid Anatomy of Congestive Cardiac Failore.—The 
pathological changes found at autopsy are best described under 
the various systems involved. 

1. The Cardio- Vascular System . — No detailed description 
need be given at this point of the pathological changes in the 
heart, as these are described in the sections allotted to the 
various types of valvular lesion. It is true, however, to say 
that in congestive failure, whatever its origin, the right 
ventricle is dilated, with widening of the tricuspid valve ; 
the great veins, as a result of increased diflieulty in discharging 
their contents into the auricle, are dilated, and as a result 



CONGESTIVE CARDIAC FAILURE 559 

fluid collects in the subcutaneous tissues, particularly those 
of the most dependent parts. Stasis in the dilated auricles 
or veins frequently leads to the formation of thrombi, 
wliich may bwome wholly or partially detached and lead 
to embolism and infarction. Clots from the right auricle 
wiU lodge in the lungs, while those from the left side of the 
heart may produce infarction anywhere in the systemic 
circulation. Further, as a result of the increased venous 
pressure, passive effusions may collect in the serous cavities, 
most commonly in the peritoneum, and less frequently in 
one or both pleural cavities, and in the pericardium. In 
severe cases there may be a generalised anasarca, involving, 
in addition, the abdominal wall and the scrotum. 

2. The Lungs . — In chronic cases the lungs are tougher and 
redder than normal, and the condition is described as red 
induration. On histological section many of the alveoli are 
filled with exudate containing red cells and the so-called heart 
failure colls, which include blood pigment. Sometimes actual 
areas of hsemorrhage occur in the substance of the lung, known 
as pulmonary apoplexy. In addition, there may be infarcted 
areas which result from the occlusion of a branch of the pul- 
monary artery by an embolus consisting of a detached portion 
of thrombus formed in the right auricle. Such infarctions are 
roughly wedge-shaped, and are found with their base on the 
visceral layer of the pleura ; the infarcted areas are red in 
colour, and the pleura overlying them shows evidence of a 
pleurisy, sometimes complicated with an effusion which may 
be blood-stained. On section of the lung much oedema fluid 
may be expressed, particularly at the bases. In the bronchi 
there is an excess of blood-stained secretion. 

3. Alimentary System . — Owing to the condition of general 
venous stasis, characteristic changes occur in the liver, and to 
a less extent in the spleen and alimentary canal. The liver is 
usually described as nutmeg in type, owing to its peculiar 
appearance on section ; there is considerable general enlarge- 
ment, and the capsule is tense ; on section, the cut surface 
consists of a large number of dark red points surrounded by 
a greyish or yellowish zone ; the red areas are around the 
central veins of the lobule, while the outer zones of the lobule 
are yellow from fatty degeneration. 

The spleen is firmer than usual owing to increase in its 
fibrous tissue elements, and in colour a dark purple ; it is 
rarely enlarged, and sometimes may be smaller than normal. 
Recent or old mfarcts are common. 

The mucous membrane of the alimentary canal, particularly 



560 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO- VASCULAR SYSTEM 

in the stomach, is dark and congested ; petechial haemorrhages 
may be present with an increased secretion of mucus and 
sometimes minute erosions of the mucous membrane, which 
may lead to haemorrhage into the cavity of the stomach. 
Gangrene resulting from embolism of the mesenteric vessels 
is a rare complication. 

4. Kidneys , — The kidneys in congestive failure are often 
described as “ india-rubber,” owing to the increased toughness 
of their substance. They are somewhat enlarged, markedly 
firm, and dark in colour. On section, the cortex is wide and 
well differentiated from the medulla. Scarring due to old or 
recent infarcts may be found. 

5. The Central Nervous System , — Cerebral softening may 
result from infarction due to clots from the left auricle or 
fragments of vegetations detached from the mitral or aortic 
valves. This may occur in chronic valvular disease, but is 
more common in subacute bacterial endocarditis. 

Signs and Symptoms of Congestive Cardiac Failure. — A 
patient with severe congestive failure presents so typical a 
picture that no long description is necessary. Breathlessness 
is perhaps the most constant and striking feature ; even at 
absolute rest dyspnoea is obvious. When failure of the left 
ventricle is added the patient breathes far more comfortably 
while propped up (orthop)ioea). He is markedly restless and is 
constantly making attempts to cough, which are often ineffective 
or may produce a little frothy and sometimes blood-stained 
sputum. The restlessness and coughing prevent sleep, and in 
consequence troublesome insomnia adds to the burden thrown 
upon the heart. The complexion varies from pallor to cyanosis, 
and the latter is specially marked in the ears, the tip of the 
nose, and the extremities. Although the subjects of valvular 
disease are usually thin, this may be masked to some extent 
by oedema, and the abdomen is distended by ascites and enlarge- 
ment of the liver. Abdominal pain and vomiting are common ; 
the form^ is due to the enlarged and tender liver, and the 
latter to the clironic gastritis produced by the passive venous 
congestion in the gastric mucous membrane. The veins are 
markedly distended with blood, and those in the neck may be 
seen pulsating. In the more severe cases profuse sweating 
may be a striking feature, and the patient is cold and clammy, 
while the mouth temperature is recorded as subnormal. 

Emboli, consisting either of fragments of clot from the 
auricles or of portions of valvular vegetations, may produce 
symptoms depending on the localisation of the infarcts pro- 
duced. Sudden pain in the chest, with dyspnoea, haemoptysis, 



CONGESTIVE CARDIAC FAILURE 561 

and later a pleural rub, indicate infarction of the lung, which 
may be followed by a pleural effusion often blood-stained. 
Emboli from the left side of the heart may produce sudden 
hemiplegia, due to a cerebral embolus. Pain in the region of 
the spleen and occasionally a rub may indicate infarction. 
Other less conunon sites of embolism are : (1) peripheral vessels 
in the limbs, especially the legs ; (2) retinal vessels ; (3) mesen- 
teric vessels ; (4) renal arteries, resulting in transient hsematuria 
and albuminuria. Embolic manifestations such as those 
described above occiur most fiequently in congestive failure 
and mitral stenosis or in subacute bacterial endocarditis ; of 
the latter condition they may be an outstanding feature. 

Such is the clinical picture of severe congestive failure, but 
sometimes one particular group of symptoms may predominate. 
Thus, for example, indigestion and vomiting may suggest an 
abdominal condition, and the true pathology of the symptoms 
only becomes apparent on finding a cardiac lesion with an 
enlarged and tender liver. 

In some cases of cardiac failure mental symptoms may be 
a prominent feature. Apart from restlessness and anxiety the 
patient becomes the victim of terrifying dreams and hallucina- 
tions, which may lead on to a state of complete confusion and 
disorientation. When these symptoms develop early, the 
patient needs careful watching lest he jump out of bed and 
injure himself. Occasionally violent delirium develops. As a 
rule severe mental symptoms are of grave prognosis. 

On physical examination, apart from the signs of valvular 
disease, there is found to be increased cardiac dullness to the 
right of the sternum, indicating dilatation of the right side of 
the heart. On examination of the chest the respirations are 
frequent and shallow ; the percussion note at the bases of 
the lungs is impaired and, if pleural effusions are present, 
there may be a board-like dullness ; on auscultation rales 
are heard over the bases, and sometimes signs of a more 
generalised bronchitis are present. The liver is easily palpable 
and may extend as low as the umbilicus ; it is markedly 
tender, and may be felt to pulsate. The spleen is rarely 
palpable. If ascites is present, fluid may be detected by a 
thrill and movable dullness ; often the amount of distention 
and eversion of the umbilicus may make the diagnosis of 
ascites obvious without any physical examination. 

The pulse is always rapid, and often markedly irregular 
owing to the presence of auricular fibrillation {vide p. 617). 
Other arrhythmias, i)articularly extra-systoles, are frequent 
accompaniments of congestive failure, 

^6 



662 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

In the milder cases of congestive failure, when the patient 
has only few symptoms, a careful examination may detect 
physical signs which point to the true diagnosis. Coarse r&les 
at the bases often occur long before any oedema or marked 
dyspnoea, and sometimes tenderness imder the right costal 
margin may indicate the early stages of venous congestion of 
the liver, even though there is no obvious enlargement of 
that organ. Increased venous pressure may be demonstrated 
by the failure of the veins of the arms to collapse rapidly 
when the limb is elevated above the level of the manubrium. 
Congestive failure, however mild, necessarily implies some 
degree of breathlessness at rest. 


TREATMENT OF CARDIAC FAILURE 

It has been emphasised that the most important factor 
which determines the onset of cardiac failure is the condition 
of the heart muscle. If the muscle remains even relatively 
undamaged the presence of chronic valvular disease will 
produce few if any symptoms. So great is the reserve power 
of the healthy myocardium that even moderately severe 
grades of mitral and aortic valvular disease are not incom- 
patible with reasonable longevity and activity. It must, 
however, be borne in mind that the presence of chronic valvular 
disease nearly always indicates that at some time in the past 
there has been more or less severe inflammation of the myo- 
cardium, and this, coupled with the extra strain thrown on the 
heart muscle by valvular disease, is extremely likely to lead 
ultimately to cardiac failure. In chronic valvular disease, 
myocardial insufficiency frequently arises in late middle life as 
a result of the gradual impairment of the functional capacity of 
the heart muscle, in common with that of the skeletal muscles. 

The Prophylaxis of Cardiac Failure. — ^The treatment of 
acute carditis has already been discussed elsewhere, but there 
remains the problem of the patient who, after an acute carditis, 
usually due to rheumatic fever, is left with a heart damaged 
by valvular disease. 

1. Avoidance of Further Attacks of Rheumatic Fever . — K 
the patient is a child, there is a grave risk tliat further recur- 
rences of acute rheumatism may cause additional damage 
to the heart, and it is therefore all-important that the patient 
should be shielded as far as possible from such attacks. If 
possible, the child should be removed to healthy surroundings 
in the country, and all factors such as overcrowding and 



TREATMENT OP CARDIAC FAILURE 


563 


defective nutrition Bhould be eliminated. Unfortunately, 
under present social conditions this is usually impossible 
except among the rich. If the patient is of the industrial 
class, something may be gained by sending him to a special 
school for rheumatic or invalid children. 

2. Occupation. — ^The question of occupation is an important 
one in patients with damaged hearts. All occupations which 
involve heavy manual work are highly unsuitable. Clerical 
or business work of some kind is sometimes a solution. High 
altitudes and hot climates are to be avoided. 

3. Personal Hygiene. — Focal infection must be avoided. 
The teeth should be kept in good order, and all carious or 
dead teeth removed, as infection from such a source may 
produce infective endocarditis. Wholesale tonsillectomy in 
rheumatic patients has nothing to recommend it, but if the 
tonsUs are a focus of chronic sepsis they should be removed. 
When no signs of failure are present, an ordinary diet is satis- 
factory, As regards exercise, though it must be realised that a 
patient with a damaged heart has a diminished cardiac reserve, 
it is most important from the point of view of general health 
that reasonable exercise and fresh air should be encouraged. 
The patient’s own sensations form the best criterion as to the 
amount of exercise to be allowed. Fatigue and breathlessness 
will be a sufficient warning that the heart muscle is being 
overtaxed. In all cases with chronic valvular lesions, strenuous 
competitive games such as football, boxing, and running must 
be forbidden, but more moderate exercise such as walking 
or golf are often beneficial. More sleep is needed by a cardiac 
patient than by a healthy person, and all factors which produce 
insomnia must be avoided. 

4. Mental Hygiene. — It is most important that a patient 
with a valvular lesion should not be allowed to drift into 
c^ornc invalidism through too much concentration on his 
disability. While it must be explained to him that reasonable 
precautions must bo taken, he should be encouraged to regard 
himself as capable of a normal and useful life. Not infre- 
quently patients with valvular disease have a haunting fear 
that they may suddenly drop dectd, and it should be explained 
to them that there is no risk of this occurring. 

Treatment ol Incipient Failure. — Having dealt with what 
might be termed the prophylactic treatment of cardiac failure, 
we must now consider the case of the patient with a damaged 
heart, who shows early signs of cardiac failure. This may 
be manifested in various ways, such as undue dyspnoea on 
exertion, tachycardia or arrhythmia, or digestive disturbances. 



664 DISEASES OP THE CABDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

The ocourrenoe of such symptoms is an indication that the 
capacity of the heart muscle is being overtaxed, and a warning 
that, in the absence of adequate steps to adjust the life and 
regime of the patient to his condition, more severe S 3 miptoms 
will develop. As a rule it is desirable that the heart should be 
rested by confining the patient to bed for a few days, though 
when the symptoms are slight, prolonged or absolute rest in 
bed is unnecessary. In oases with threatened failure it is most 
important to avoid respiratory infections, such as bronchitis, 
owing to the extra work thrown upon the heart by 
coughing. Adequate clothing and the avoidemce of draughts 
and damp will contribute to this object, and in times when 
epidemics of catarrhal disease are prevalent, places where 
infection is likely to be contracted, such as churches and 
theatres, should be avoided. An attempt must also be made 
to minimise unnecessary exertion, such as climbing of stairs. 
Pregnancy must be avoided at all costs, as it is likely to produce 
cardiac breakdown. If the symptoms of impending failure 
are gastric, the diet should be modified by taking small meals 
of diy food, with some limitation of the fluid intake ; starchy 
foods such as puddings must not be taken owing to the flatu- 
lence which may result. The question of the ^ministration 
of drugs is a debatable point. Provided the pulse remains 
regular, it is doubtful whether anything is gained by giving 
digitalis. If the patient's work involves manual labour he 
should be advised to obtain a more Bedeniaty occupation. 

Treatment of Congestive Cardiac Failure 

We now have to deal with the problem of established cardiac 
failure. The patient is breathless even at rest, mdema is 
present, and there may be effusions in the pleural or peritoneal 
cavities ; cyanosis is often marked, and the condition is 
obviously one in which life itself is in danger. In a large pro- 
portion of cases amicular fibrillation is present. The objects of 
treatment are threefold : the procuring of complete rest ; the 
relief of the venous congestion, and the restoration of a more 
normal pulse-rate. These points are dealt with in detail below. 

1. Best. — ^Needless to say, absolute rest is essential. 
Usually dyspnoea prevents the patient lying flat, and a sitting 
posture in bed is found to be most comfortable. He should 
be prevented from doing too much for himself, and satisfactory 
progress depends mainly on careful nursing. Patients wdth 
marked orthopnoea are sometimes more comfortable propped 
up in an arm-chair. The most valuable drug for procuring 



TREATMENT OF CARDIAC FAILURE 


565 


adequate rest in a patient with severe heart failure is morphia. 
This should be given in a dose of J gr. hypodermically ; if 
there is oedema of the lungs gr. of atropine should be given 
simultaneously. With such treatment the patient rapidly 
ceases to be restless and will often obtain a reasonable period 
of sleep, from which he awakes marvellously improved. No 
attention need be paid to the theoretical risk of depressing 
the heart with morphia, and the drug should never be with- 
held in restless and anxious patients with severe cardiac failure. 
In milder ccwes, or after improvement has taken place, chloral, 
bromide, or paraldehyde may be given by mouth. 

2. Belief of Venous Congestion. — In severe congestive 
failure, whatever the lesion, the patient is usually cyanosed, 
the veins distended, and the car^ac dullness is increased to 
the right of the sternum. The symptoms may often be relieved, 
at any rate temporarily, by venesection, and generally this is 
most useful if done as soon as possible after the patient is seen. 
From 1 to 1^ pints of blood should be withdrawn. The simplest 
and cleanest method is, after compressing the upper arm, to 
insert a needle into a vein at the bend of the elbow and connect 
it to a suction bottle. With a needle of reasonably wide bore 
there is usually no difficulty with clotting. The withdrawal 
of a pint or so of blood at once lessens the strain on the heart 
and produces an immediate and remarkable improvement. 
Venesection is of particular value in congestive failure secondary 
to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. The most dramatic 
improvement occurs in patients whose red cell count is well 
over five millions. 

3. Slowing of the Pulse. — In most cases of severe congestive 
failure, especially with mitral stenosis, auricular fibrillation 
is present, and the ventricle is contracting at a rate of 120 a 
minute, or over. In such instances, it is important to reduce 
the heart rate as rapidly as possible, and fortunately in digitalis 
we have a drug which can effect this object (vide p. 520). 

There are certain other points that must be considered .• — 

1. Diet , — During the acute stage of failure, owing to the 
tendency to vomiting, there is no object in attempting to force 
food upon the patient. A diet of not more than two pints of 
milk a day, given in small amounts at frequent intervals, is 
usually satisfactory. The amount of fluids should be limit^, 
specially when there is much oedema, and the amoimt of salt 
in the diet should be reduced to a minimum, though a salt-free 
diet is unnecessary unless all other measures have failed. 
When improvement has taken place meals should still be 
frequent, small, and dry in character. 



566 DISEASES OF THE CAEDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

2. Use of Oxygen . — Oxygen is undoubtedly of value if the 
patient is cyanosed. It sho^d be given continuously through 
a nasal catheter after being bubbled through warm water. 
By moistening the gas, it prevents excessive drying of the 
naso-pharynx, and it also enables the attendant to see at a 
glance that a steady stream of gas is passing into the catheter. 
A mask or oxygen tent may be unsatisfactory in cardiac 
failure, if it produces a subjective feeling of suffocation, which 
more than counterbalances the value of the oxygen. 

3. (EdemUy Ascit^, and Pleural Effusion . — In all severe 
cases of congestive failure there is some degree of anasarca. 
As a rule, under the influence of rest and digitalis this rapidly 
diminishes, but sometimes the condition is more obstinate. 
Ascites which seriously embarrasses respiration should be 
relieved by paracentesis. Pleural effusions are seldom large, 
but if dullness extend above the angle of the scapula, aspiration 
often relieves the patient. With the use of mercurial diuretics 
acupuncture is unnecessary and should never be employed. 
When anasarca is a prominent feature, the administration ol 
Guy’s pill is often beneficial. This consists of mercury pill 
B.P. 1 gr. powdered squill 1 gr. digitalis leaf in powder 1 gr., 
and extract of hyoscyamus to 4 gr. ; one pill may be taken 
three times a day. As a diuretic, theobromine sodium salicylate 
is sometimes useful, given for several days in doses of 15 gr. 
thrice daily. 

The most effective treatment for anasarca is the administra- 
tion of mercurial diuretics, mersalyl (salyrgan), neptal or 
esidrone. These drugs are available in ampoules for intra- 
muscular or intravenous use. A preliminary dose of 1 c.c. 
of a 10 per cent, solution is given intramuscularly. If this 
does not produce signs of intolerance, such as hsematuria or 
severe diarrhoea, a course of injections at four-day intervals 
may be started, giving 2 c.c. of the solution. Intramuscular 
injections are effective but the drug is best given intravenously 
diluted with 5 c.c. of saline. The diuretic effect is enhanced 
by giving ammonium chloride by mouth (30 gr. in capsules) 
two hours before injection. The diuretic effect ia mainly 
during the twelve hours following injection and 100 oz. of 
urine or more may be passed in this period. The drug should, 
therefore, be given in the morning in order to avoid sleep being 
disturbed. At the same time fluids are restricted to 40 oz. or 
less if possible. It is most important not to give these drugs 
if thei*e is evidence of renal failure. The moderate albuminuria, 
which so often occurs in congestive failure, does not, however, 
contraindicate its use. 



PERIPHERAL CIRCULATORY FAILURE 667 


4. CardicLC Stimulants . — The multiplicity of drugs to which 
a tonic action on the heart muscle has been ascribed is 
sufficient proof that none of them has any specific action. 
As a general principle it is true to say that repeated hypo- 
dermic injections of “ cardiac tonics,” whether they consist of 
camphor, strychnine, adrenalin, or other drug, do more harm 
than good to a patient who is severely ill. Alcohol is some- 
times useful not so much from any direct action upon the heart 
as from its tendency to induce sleep and to allay restlessness 
and anxiety. It is best given as brandy or champagne. 

After-treatment of Cases with Cardiac Failure. — Once a 
severe cardiac breakdown has occurred, the patient will never 
be fit for any work which involves much physical exertion. 
It is, however, remarkable what a striking recovery may take 
place, and patients, even with established auricular fibrillation, 
may live in comparative comfort for many years. Fibrillation 
calls for the cxyniinued iise of digitalis in quantities sufficient 
to keep the heart rate about 70. During convalescence from 
acute congestive failure, exercise must be begun very graduaUy ; 
at first passive movements should be started while the patient 
is stiU in bed, and these are soon followed by active movements. 
Great improvement in the exercise tolerance may be gained 
by a course of progressive remedial exercises under the super- 
vision of an expert in the subject. All the precautions wffich 
have been already described above for patients with threatened 
cardiac failure must be observed, particularly as regards the 
avoidance of respiratory infections. When a tendency to 
oedema persists, merciuial diuretics may be given at three or 
four day intervals indefinitely. 


PERIPHERAL CIRCULATORY FAILURE 

Peripheral circulatory failure is the term used for circulatory 
disturbance in which there is a diminution in the venous return 
to the heart, this being due primarily to failure of the peripheral 
bed to retain its contents, or to loss of peripheral vascular 
tone resulting in failure of the blood to return to the heart, 
or finally to an actual diminution in volume of the circulating 
blood. In congestive heart failure there is a diminution in the 
venous return secondary to a decrease in the cardiac output 
with a tendency to engorgement of the veins. In peripheral 
circulatory failure, the veins are relatively depleted. 

Peripheral circulatory failure results from many different 
mechanisms, the chief one being the diminution in volume 



668 DISEASES OP THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

of circulating blood. The classical clinical picture exhibiting 
peripheral circulatory failure is that of surgical shock as seen 
following trauma, haemorrhage, surgical operation, or perfora- 
tion of a hollow viscus. The characteristic features are a pale, 
damp, cold skin, showing a cyanotic tinge, and rapid shallow 
respiration. The pulse is usually rapid and of very low tension ; 
the blood pressure is always low ; the pupils are dilated and 
react sluggishly to light ; the urinary volume is diminished. 

It is now generally accepted that the type of circulatory 
failure which is so commonly seen in conditions of diabetic 
acidosis, Addison’s disease, acute pancreatitis, acute diffuse 
peritonitis, severe vomiting or diarrhoea, and severe bums is 
due primarily to peripheral circulatory failure in which there 
is a diminution in the volume of circulating blood. The 
clinical appearances in these various conditions are practically 
identical with the classical picture of surgical shock. Many 
theories have been put forward to explain the mechanism of 
peripheral circulatory failure. The chief factors at work in 
the different conditions are ; — 

1. A neurogenic reflex causing a peripheral vasodilatation, 
e.gr,, as seen in primary surgical shock and a perforated viscus. 

2. The diminution in the volume of circulatory blood 
brought about by one of three mechanisms : 

(а) The loss of large quantities of fluid, c.gr., in conditions 

of severe ha?morrhago, vomiting, or diarrhoea. 

(б) The loss of salt where both the sodium and the 

chloride molecules play an important part, c.j., 
in diabetic acidosis, Addison’s disease. 

{c) The loss or extravasation of plasma, e.gr., in diffuse 
peritonitis and severe bums. 

In some cases profuse perspiration and hyperventilation 
also play a part in diminishing the volume of circulatory 
blood. 

It is important to realise that not mfirequently there may 
be a combination of cardiac (central) failure and peripheral 
failure. Of chief interest in this cozmection are coronary 
thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and acute infections. For 
example, in the initial stages of coronary thrombosis, it is 
rare to find signs of congestive cardiac failure, but usual to 
find the patient in a typical state of shock. Later on, as the 
state of shock passes off and the damaged heart has to deal 
with an increasing volume of blood returning firom the periphery, 
the typical signs of venous engorgement begin to appear, and 
the picture of congestive cardiac failure develops. 



PERIPHERAL CIRCULATORY FAILURE 669 


The mechanism of peripheral circulatory failure in myocardial 
infarction is probably identical with that of the primary surgical 
shock associated with trauma. Fluid is retained in the relaxed 
small vessels with a resultant depleted venous return to the heart. 

In pulmonary embolism the clinical picture is a variable 
one, both cardiac and peripheral factors being present in 
varying proportions. If the embolus is a large one and causes 
complete obstruction of the pulmonary artery, then death is 
almost instantaneous and is due to an acute heart failure. 
In cases where massive embolism is incomplete, death is usually 
delayed, and in these cases there is a combination of heart 
failure and shock. When shock is the outstanding factor, the 
patient is pale and covered with perspiration, and the pulse is 
almost impalpable ; when the cardiac factor is predominant 
there is engorgement of the veins of the neck, intense cyanosis, 
and rapid enlargement of the liver. 

In acute infections also both peripheral circulatory failure 
and cardiac failure may be foimd. Originally the circulatory 
collapse in acute infection was attributed to cardiac failure, 
but it is now generally accepted that apart from rheumatic 
fever and diphtheria the circulatory failure is usually due to 
a peripheral mechanism. In those cases where cardiac failure 
is the predominant feature, it is probable that the heart has 
already been damaged by arteriosclerosis or other disease 
prior to the acute infection. Cardiac failure in acute infections 
is shown by the increase in venous pressure resulting in 
dyspnoea out of proportion to the fever, and engorgement of the 
liver. However, the findings are usually complicated by the 
presence of peripheral circulatory failure, and in this event 
the clinical picture is similar to that of surgical shock together 
with the features of the particular infective disease. The skin 
is pale and sweating, and the cyanosis present has a greyish 
tinge, being counterbalanced by the pallor. The extremities 
are cold and there is no dyspnoea. The superficial veins are 
collapsed and the venous pressure is low. It is probable that 
the mechanism of the circulatory collapse in the acute infections 
is also due to a diminution in the volume of the circulating 
blood, the mechanism of which is not yet fully explained. 

Circvlatoiy Failure in Pneumonia , — It is generally agreed 
that congestive heart failure is unusual in patients who develop 
lobar pneumonia with a healthy heart, and the severe dreaded 
circulatory collapses heralding death in this disease are due to a 
peripheral circulatory failiire. The pathogenesis of this failure is 
not clear, but is po^ibly related to a toxic effect on the oapillaries. 

CircvkUory Failure in Diphtheria , — ^The cardiac complications 



570 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

of diphtheria are of two main types. In severe cases, towards 
the end of the first or early in the second week, there may be 
acute circulatory failure with low blood pressure and a feeble 
pulse ; gross oedema is not common. 

In some cases, especially in those with nerve paralysis, acute 
diphtheritic myocarditis may occur about the fourth w^eek. Here 
heart block is not uncommon though the ventricular rate is often 
relatively fast : vomiting may be a grave warning and dyspnoea, 
venous engorgement, and a tender liver may follow ; sudden death 
and left ventricular failure are the serious risks. Peripheral 
circulatory failure is an added complication in both types. 

Though these immediate effects are so serious, the patient 
ultimately makes a complete recovery if he survives. Except 
for rare cases of heart block, diphtheria does not produce any 
form of permanent cardiac damage. 

Circulatory Collapse in Typhoid Fever. — As in pneumonia, 
circulatory collapse is usually peripheral in origin, the systemic 
veins are collapsed, and symptoms and signs of venous 
engorgement are absent. 

In most general infections, except rheumatic fever and 
diphtheria, the reaction of the heart and circulation is similar 
to its reaction to pneumonia and typhoid fever. 

Treatment of Peripheral Circulatory Failure. — Treatment is 
that given for ordinary surgical shock. The patient should 
be thoroughly warmed and be given hot drinks, and the foot 
of the bed should be raised. Saline and glucose solutions may 
be given by^ the intravenous, subcutaneous, or rectal routes. 
Intravenous “ drip saline ” or intravenous injection of plasma 
or serum may give dramatic results ; strychnine, pituitrin, 
coramine, adrenalin, and ephedrine are often effective, (bn- 
tinued administration of oxygen is generally useful. 


PREGNAN(T AND HEART DISEASE 

In dealing with this subject there arc two generally accepted 
propositions : firstly, that auricular fibrillation should be a 
complete bar to pregnancy ; secondly, tliat chronic valvular 
disease without any evidence of failure is compatible with 
satisfactory pregnancies and lalK)ur, provided these are not 
too numerous nor follow in too rapid succession. The difficult 
problems in connection with pregnancy and heart disease arise 
in that class of woman where, with a valvular lesion, there are 
slight indications that all is not well with the heart muscle, 
in other words, in cases of threatened cardiac failure. If the 



CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 


571 


doctor is called upon to advise as to whether such a patient 
should run the risk of pregnancy, the answer should certainly 
be in the negative. Unfortunately, however, as a rule pregnancy 
has already occurred before advice is sought, and the problem 
to be decided between the obstetric surgeon and the physician 
becomes not whether pregnancy is desirable but how its 
presence is to be dealt with. The answer will depend largely 
on the stage of pregnancy that has been reached when the 
patient is first seen. If she is not beyond the third month, 
termination of the pregnancy is without danger, but in the 
later months induction involves probably little less risk than 
labour at terra. On the whole, it may be said that there is a 
tendency to overrate the danger likely to result from pregnancy, 
unless the patient has or has had a definite cardiac breakdown. 
In patients with auricular fibrillation, pregnancy, if allowed 
to go to terra, results in the mother’s death in approximately 
a third of the cases. 

The treatment of pregnant women with damaged hearts is 
important. During the last few months of pregnancy they 
should be practically if not completely confined to bed, and 
under the influence of rest, and perhaps digitalis, the outlook 
as regards a satisfactory termination is much improved. It 
is most important that the second stage of labour should not 
be imduly prolonged, but decision as to the method of delivery 
must be left to the obstetrician. 

The anxiety for a first child and the patient’s social circum- 
stances must be taken into account in deciding whether to 
advise for or against pregnancy. No woman with organic heart 
disease, however sound the heart muscle may appear to be, 
should as a rule be allowed to go through more than three 
pregnancies ; should there be any persistent diminution in the 
exercise tolerance following a pregnancy, no further risks should 
be run. It is not only the risks of labour that have to be con- 
sidered but the increased work that children will bring through- 
out the successive yee.rs when the heart is requiring additional 
rest. 


CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 

One of the striking features of congenital heart disease is 
the apparent absence of any correlation between the physical 
signs detected on examination of the heart and the severity 
of the symptoms displayed by the patient. Even with intense 
cyanosis there may be no murmurs, and, conversely, well- 
marked physical signs may be accompanied by no apparent 



672 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO VASCULAR SYSTEM 

disturbance in the circulation and no discomfort. It is to be 
borne in mind, also, that congenital defects in the structure 
of the heart are usually multiple, and less often occur singly. 
A further feature of great clinical interest is the high incidence 
of infective endocarditis in these cases. Even when the ana- 
tomical abnormality is so slight that it gives rise to no disturbance 
in the circulation and throws no extra strain on the myocardium, 
for example, supernumerary cusps, or two cusps in place of the 
normal three, infective endocarditis with characteristic vegeta- 
tions is prone to become implanted on the abnormal valve. 

Congenital disease of the heart may be defined as a con- 
dition in which there are present in the heart and great vessels 
certain anomalies of structure which have arisen either through 
arrest of development or possibly through disease occurring 
during intra-uterine life. Whether such anomalies lead to 
circulatory disturbances depends on their nature. In many 
cases the defects are incompatible with life ; in others, the 
anomaly may give rise to no disturbance of function, being 
an accidental autopsy finding, such as two or four aortic or 
pulmonary cusps, patent foramen ovale, or dextrocardia. 

Symptoms. — Symptoms of congenital disease of the heart 
may be present from birth or may develop later. Cyanosis is 
usually the first sign of most t)rpes of congenital heart disease, 
and is present in nearly aJl severe cases. It is so characteristic 
that the terms “ blue baby and congenital heart disease 
are practically synonymous. It is most marked in the face, 
ears, hands, feet, and mucous membranes. Among the factors 
responsible for the cyanosis are : (a) a mixture of arterial 
and venous blood ; (6) deficient oxygenation in the lungs ; 
(c) general venous engorgement. There is usually a marked 
increase in the red cells, up to as many as 11 ,000,000 ; 
the specific gravity of the blood is abnormally high and the 
percentage of hemoglobin raised. Hemorrhages from the 
mucous membranes may occur, and clubbing of the fingers and 
toes is exceedingly common. Chronic cough and easily induced 
breathlessness are striking features, and as a rule the child is 
undergrown, weakly, and succumbs early. If adult life is 
reached, pulmonary stenosis is probably the main defect. Loud 
murmurs are usually present and the heart is enlarged, particu- 
larly to the right. Clubbing, cyanosis, cardiac enlargement, and 
a murmur render congenital heart disease almost a certainty ; 
the precise nature of the abnormality may be impossible to 
diagnose. It must be remembered that striking cyanosis may 
be produced by methaBmoglobinaemia or sulphiemoglobinsBmia 
{vide p. .773). In these patients, however, there is no d 3 rspn<Ba. 



CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 673 

Congenital Pulmonary Stenosifl. — ^With advanced grades of 
this condition clubbing and cyanosis are marked ; the pre- 
cordium is often bulging, and the cardiac impulse heaving 
and diffuse in character. A systolic thrill and murmur may 
be present over the pulmonary area, the second sound being 
feeble or absent. Usually other defects are also present, such 
as patent foramen ovale, patent ventricular septum, patent 
ductus curteriosus, or anomalies in the position of the aorta 
and pulmonary artery. The common combination of pulmonary 
stenosis, patent ventricular septum, dextro-position of the aorta 
and right ventricular enlargement is known as Fallot’s tetrology. 

Defects of the Interaoricnlar Septum. — Patent foramen ovale 
is the commonest variety of congenital heart disease found 
post-mortem. In most cases, however, the opening is not 
large enough to produce symptoms (though it may produce 
a systolic murmur) except that it may enable an embolus 
which originated in a peripheral vein to reach a systemic 
artery with the production of so-called “ paradoxical embolism.” 

Auricular septal defect in which the opening is large and 
of different embryological origin has been distinguished. Often 
such patients have no special symptoms when they are yoimg 
as the blood passes from the left to the right side. Later, perhaps 
after some illness such as pneumonia, the pressure on the right 
side rises so that the flow is reversed and cyanosis follows 
(cyanose tardive). The combination of this with mitral stenosis 
is by no means uncommon. 

Patent Interventricular Septum. — A harsh systolic murmur 
may be heard to the left of the mid-line in the third and fourth 
spaces, sometimes accompanied by a thrill. This is the 
commonest cardiac defect to give rise to physical signs and 
accounts for a good number of the cases found in children at 
routine medical examinations. Fortunately it is generally a 
small opening that does not give rise to clinical symptoms and 
has an excellent prognosis. 

In other cases the defect of the septum is large and here 
there may be no physical signs in the heart though cyanosis 
will become moderate or severe from mixing of blood. Tliis 
18 often combined with pulmonary stenosis, but may also be 
the explanation of “ morbus coeruleus ” with no murmurs. 

Patent Ductus Arteriosus may be found alone or in com- 
bination with other lesions. It is a short thick trunk connecting 
the pi^onary artery (left branch) and the aorta. When 
persisting throughout life it is commonly associated with 
pulmonary stenosis, transposition of the great vessels, or stenosis 
of the aorta. Enlargement of the right ventricle is a constant 



574 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

acoompaniment. Cyanosis and clubbing are not so common 
in this condition as in other congenital affections, and the 
diagnosis depends almost entirely on the presence of a harsh 
murmur of maximum intensity in the second left interspace. 
The murmur persists usually throughout systole and diastole, 
with systoUc accentuation. It is transmitted upwards and to 
the left, and may be well heard in the left interscapular region. 
It is commonly accompanied by a thrill and a low pulse pressure 
or sometimes by a “ water-hammer ” pulse. 

Dextrocardia. — The heart is on the right side as the result 
of transposition of the viscera, the stomach and spleen being 
on the right and the liver on the left side. Very rarely the 
heart is alone transposed. Dextrocardia has no clinical 
significance, but must be distinguished from a heart displaced 
to the right by intrathoracic di^ase. As it is inherited as a 
Mendehan recessive character it is more common in the offsprings 
of first cousin marriages. 

Coarctation ol the Aorta. — This congenital anomaly pro- 
duces a characteristic clinical picture. By coarctation is meant 
a stenosis of the aorta between the left subclavian artery and 
the ductus arteriosus. The lumen of the aorta may vary from 
a simple narrowing to complete obliteration. The character- 
istic clinical features of these cases are high blood pressure 
in the arms and upper half of the body, cardiac enlargement, 
and imusual prominence of the superficial arteries, particularly 
round the scapulae. There may be delay between the radial 
and femoral pulses. The blood pressure of the upper and 
lower limbs differs more widely than is usual. Loud murmurs 
at the base simulating aortic stenosis or over the aorta behind 
are not uncommon. The ribs, w^hen examined by X-rays, may 
be notched by the enlarged anastomosing vessels. Post-mortem 
an elaborate anastomosis is found between the branches of 
the aorta above and those below the narrowing, the anastomos- 
ing vessels showing marked hypertrophy. The prognosis is 
generally good. 


EFFORT 8YNDROME 

Da Costa* 8 Syndrome, N euro-circvlaiory Asthenia) 

During the war of 1914-18 large numbers of soldiers were 
off duty with a diagnosis of “ Disorderly Action of the Heart 
(D.A.H.) in contradistinction to “ Valvular Disease of the 
Heart ” (V.D.H.). Their main complaints of breathlessness, 
precordial pain, and palpitation were unaccompanied by objec- 
tive evidence of heart disease. In the present war, though 



EFFORT SYNDROME 


575 


similar cases have oocurred they have been relatively infrequent. 
Similar symptoms had been noted in the American Civil War, 
and less commonly in peace time. 

Clinical Picture. — The most frequent symptoms of which 
these patients complain are fatigue, palpitation, dizziness, 
breathlessness even on slight exertion, left submammary pain, 
nervousness and sweating. On physical examination the pulse 
even at rest is relatively rapid, often over 100, respiration tends 
to be rapid, and the patient is often obviously nervous, tremulous, 
and excitable. Visible sweating of the palms and axillae are 
often striking features even in cold weather. 

Enquiry into the patient’s history usually elicits that he 
has always been regarded as delicate and often has been stopped 
from playing games at school. General physique and muscular 
development are usually under average, and the patient often 
gives a history of a tendency to hypochondriasis and nervous 
instability. Though similar symptoms may have been present 
in lesser degree in ordinary life they become markedly accentu- 
ated on joining the fighting Services. In about 50 per cent, 
of cases there is a family history of neurosis. 

On physical and radiological examination there is no evidence 
of cardiac enlargement nor of any organic disease of the heart. 
The sleeping pulse-rate is lower or normal. On percussion of 
the chest wall in the left submammary region the patient may 
complain of tenderness. The blood pressure is usually normal 
or over average. Occasionally systolic murmurs may be audible 
but these are not suggestive of valvular disease (vide p. 503). 
Electrocardiograms show no evidence of myocardial lesions. 

iEtiology. — Effort syndrome is seldom seen among members 
of aircrew, in the Navy or those branches of the Services for 
which men volunteer. This is due in the main to careful selec- 
tion, both executive and medical. The type of serving personnel 
who last war developed gross hysterical manifestations or 
D.A.H. have during the present war tended to develop obscure 
abdominal symptoms, anxiety neuroses, depressive states and 
amnesia. 

The great majority of patients with symptoms of effort 
syndrome are aiming at escaping from unpleasant Service duties, 
and though they are not often malingerers they are anxious 
to exaggerate their symptoms in the hope that a supposedly 
diseased heart will give them an honourable escape to civil 
life. Unfortunately frequent reference to specialists, hospital- 
isation and investigations, such as electrocardiograms and 
X-rays, tend to perpetuate rather than relieve their symptoms. 

Occasionally similar symptoms may occur after febrile 



676 DISEASES OP THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

illnesses such as influenza. Only too often these are diagnosed 
as myocarditis and rest is unwisely advocated, which tends to 
perpetuate the symptoms. 

Differential Diagnosis. — ^The more these patients are 
examined and investigated the less the prospect of cure. The 
whole picture is so characteristic that a cursory physical exam- 
ination is usually sufficient to exclude organic heart disease, 
thyrotoxicosis and pulmonary tuberculosis ; this last, however, 
must be remembered and it is often prudent to have an X-ray 
of the chest. The whole attitude of the patient with effort 
syndrome is completely different from that seen in organic 
heart disease. 

Treatment. — ^A good regimental medical officer will often 
be able by tactful reassurance, encouragement, and simple 
psychotherapy to ameliorate if not cure the milder cases. It 
is doubtful if more elaborate psychotherapy is likely to be 
effective. A diagnosis of effort syndrome or worse stiU any of 
its synonyms should never be made, and it is better that they 
should be labelled as anxiety neurosis, which does not cast 
aspersions on the heart. Some improvement may be obtained 
by graduated exercises in an atmosphere of expectation of cure, 
though many will fail to respond. Many of the patients can 
be rendered fit enough to carry on in lower grades, where their 
employment calls for less physical and mental stamina, but there 
will necessarily be a considerable residue completely useless for 
any form of Service life. These should be invalided as psychi- 
atric cases and not under diagnoses such as effort syndrome. 


HYPERTENSION AND ARTERIOSCLEROSIS 

Considerable confusion has arisen in connection with 
arterial disease and hypertension owing to the multiplicity 
of terms that have been employed in describing the patho- 
logical and clinical conditions involved. From the purely 
pathological point of view three varieties of arterial change 
may be recognised : (1) arteriosclerosis, (2) arteriolosclerosis, 
and (3) Monckeberg’s sclerosis. Often all three of these may 
coexist in a single patient, but more frequently there is a pre- 
ponderance of one type of change which may have an important 
bearing on the symptoms presented. 

Arteriosclerosis. — This condition may involve both the 
large arteries, especially the aorta, and the smaller vessels. 
The arteriosclerotic changes are specially striking in the descend- 
ing thoracic and abdominal aorta. The coronary arteries are 



HYPERTENSION AND ARTERIOSCLEROSIS 577 


very frequently involved, as are also the main branches of the 
aorta and the arteries at the base of the brain. The condition 
primarily affects the intima, the early atheromatous lesions 
appearing as slightly elevated yellow streaks. These areas 
later become necrotic, and atheromatous ulcers form which 
frequently become calcified. 

The result of widespread atheromatous change in a large 
artery, such as the aorta, is a great diminution in its elasticity, 
which is sometimes associated with some dilatation of its lumen. 
Aneurysms due to arteriosclerotic changes occasionally arise 
in the carotid, but in the aorta they are almost invariably due 
to syphilitic aortitis {vide p. 584), and atheromatous changes 
produce no more than a general dilatation of the aorta. Some- 
times it may spread down to involve the aortic cusps, thus 
rendering the valve incompetent. In the smaller arteries, such 
as the coronaries, proliferation of the intima and the formation 
of atheromatous plaques may so much reduce the lumen that 
eventually it may become completely occluded by formation 
of thrombus. 

Arteriolosclerosis. — In contrast to arteriosclerosis, where 
even in the smaller arteries the changes are visible to the 
naked eye, in arteriolosclerosis the changes involve only the 
arterioles, and are visible only on microscopical examination. 
This pathological process occurs most frequently and most 
strikingly in the kidneys, and for a description of the histological 
appearances reference may be made to page 728 where the 
nephroscleroses are described. Apart from the kidneys 
similar changes are found in the spleen, pancreas, and 
liver, but not in the arterioles of the lungs, myocardium, 
or skeletal muscles. 

Although arteriolosclerosis is a purely histological find- 
ing, it is of great importance, as it is the earliest and 
sometimes the only change in the arterial system in essential 
hypertension. 

Monckeberg’s Sclerosis. — ^This type of arterial disease 
affects mainly the arteries of the lower limbs of elderly persons. 
Here the media becomes calcified, often in a series of rings, 
producing the “ pipe-stem ” artery, which can often be visual- 
ised in an X-ray owing to the presence of calcium. The 
elasticity of the arterial wall is lost, and as a result the blood 
supply to distal parts is diminished. This may lead to inter- 
mittent claudication or gangrene of the toes. 

The Normal Blood Pressure. — Our knowledge of the blood 
pressure in normal persons has been obtained mainly from the 
statistics of life insurance examinations. The average pressure 
37 



678 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

in the brachial artery at var3nng ages shows a gradual increase 
in both systolic and diastolic levels with advancing age. Wide 
variations of blood pressure readings are, however, compatible 
with perfect health. In general it may be said that for adults 
a systolic blood pressure below 100 mm. of mercury or per- 
sistently above 160 mm. is likely to be an indication of disease. 
Even in the same individual there may be variations of as much 
as 20 mm. or more from time to time, depending on such 
factors as posture, excitement, exercise and meals. On the 
whole, the diastolic pressure is less liable to variations than 
the systolic. The normal range of diastolic pressure is from 
70 to 90 mm. Diastolic pressures definitely above 100 mm. are 
always pathological. 

The technique of blood pressure estimations can be learnt 
only by practical experience, and no attempt will be made 
here to give in detail the procedure to be adopted with various 
types of sphygmomanometers. It is, however, important to 
realise that the first reading may be too high, more particularly 
if the patient is nervous or excited. With a mercury sphygmo- 
manometer there is little possibility of error in the instrument 
itself, but dial types of machine readily become inaccurate, 
and should be repeatedly checked. 


ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION 

Although high blood pressure has long been known to 
be a concomitant of renal disease and of arteriosclerosis, 
the recognition of a clinical condition in which a raised 
blood pressure is an apparently primary condition is mainly 
due to the late Sir Chfford Allbutt, who coined the term 
hyperpiesia to describe such cases. Perhaps simpler is the 
term essential hypertension. 

By no means all persons with high blood pressure can be 
regarded as suffering from essential hypertension, for it is well 
recognised that in most patients with renal insufficiency there 
is some elevation of blood pressure. Also certain rare dis- 
orders of the endocrines, such as basophil adenoma of the 
pituitary {vide p. 291) or tumours of the adrenals {vide p. 286) 
may produce high blood pressure. Nevertheless essential 
hypertension is far more commonly encountered than is high 
blood pressure due to all other causes put together. Moreover 
it is difficult, if not impossible, to draw clear fines of distinction 
between essential hypertension and arteriosclerosis, for essential 
hypertension sooner or later is always accompanied by a vary- 



ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION 


579 


ing degree of arteriosclerosis, and many of the symptoms 
attributed to hypertension are really the result of ischaemia, 
which results from localised arteriosclerotic changes. It 
probably is not an exaggeration to say that most cerebral 
vascular disease, the greater part of chronic cardiac disease, 
and not an inconsiderable proportion of renal disease are the 
ultimate results of essential hypertension. 

Pathology. — The most prominent post-mortem findings in 
a patient who has died during the course of essential hyper- 
tension are cardiac hypertrophy, mainly of the left ventricle, 
and arteriolosclerotic kidneys. The naked eye and histological 
appearances of the latter are fully described on page 728. In 
addition there will be a varying degree of arteriosclerotic change 
depending on various factors such as the age and the duration 
of hypertension. 

iEtiology. — Although hypertension and its sequelae probably 
account for a quarter of all deaths which occur after fifty 
years of age, but little is known as to the underlying causes of 
the condition. Many theories have been put forward, most of 
them with little or no experimental or clinical evidence for their 
support. Thus among other theories it has been maintained 
that the hypertension is due to pressor substances circulating 
in the blood, to disturbances of the endocrines, particularly 
the adrenals and pituitary, and to disorders of protein 
metabolism. 

The one outstanding feature of essential hypertension is 
that at any rate in a very high proportion of cases there appears 
to be an inherited and constitutional basis. That hypertension 
and its sequelae, such as cerebral haemorrhage and cardiac 
disease, “ run in families ’’ is proved up to the hilt not only 
by statistics but by the personal experience of every medical 
practitioner. This does not, of course, mean that essential 
hypertension is necessarily due to hereditary influences, nor 
does it explain the mechanism of the production of hyper- 
tension in a patient in whom hereditary and constitutional 
factors are present which predispose to the condition. 

It is extremely difficult to estimate the importance of 
environmental factors, such as the increasing stress of every- 
day life, tobacco, and alcohol. Although it is true that in the 
last half-century there appears to have been an increase in 
arterial disease and its sequelae, this may be partly due to 
increasing longevity of the population and more accurate 
diagnosis. Thus it must seem remarkable to the student of 
to-day that the clinical features of coronary occlusion were not 
recognised until 1924. Nevertheless it seems probable that 



580 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO -VASCULAR SYSTEM 


prolonged and excessive indulgence in food, drink, and tobacco 
may have an adverse effect on the arterial system. 

Although almost from its name essential hypertension was 
thought to be independent of renal disease, in recent years 
Goldblatt has succeeded in producing chronic hypertension 
in animals by constricting the renal arteries. The diminution 
in renal blood flow so produced renders the kidneys relatively 
ischaemic, and the ischaemic kidneys produce a pressor sub- 
stance, which, when it passes into the circulation, gives rise 
to hypertension {vide p. 686). Possibly, therefore, in the 
essential hypertension of man the primary change may be 
an ischaemia of the kidneys due to an antecedent sclerosis of 
the renal arterioles (renal arteriolosclerosis). 

Symptoms. — As it is impossible to assess with any accuracy 
the degree to which h 37 pertension is associated with arterio- 
sclerotic changes in any individual case, it is difficult to determine 
what symptoms are to be attributed purely to hypertension. 
It is by no means rare to discover at a routine examination a 
systolic blood pressure of 200 mm. or more with a corres- 
pondingly raised diastolic pressure in a person in apparently 
perfect health. In fact many people in the forties with 
much over average blood pressure are extremely fit, active, 
and energetic. It is indeed doubtful whether a high blood 
pressure per se produces any symptoms. When these occur 
in a patient with essential hypertension they are due not 
so much to the raised pressure as to the secondary changes 
in the heart and other organs resulting from diminution in 
the blood supply. 

The manifestations, therefore, which may be ascribed to 
hypertension and its sequelae are very varied and need not be 
dealt with in detail, as their clinical features are described 
elsewhere. The more important, apart from malignant h 3 rper- 
tension (^dde p. 582), are tabulated as follows : — 

1. Cardio-vascvlar System. 

(а) Coronary sclerosis — angina {vide p. 548). 

Coronary occlusion {vide p. 553). 

(б) Left ventricular failure — attacks of cardiac 

asthma (vide p. 557). 

(c) Congestive cardiac failure (vide p. 558). 

(d) Arrhythmias, especially extra - systoles ; also 

auricular fibrillation and heart block. 

(e) Aortic regurgitation due to atheroma of valve 

cusps. 

( f ) Intermittent claudication and gangrene. 



ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION 


581 


2. Nenxms System. 

(а) Headaches (probably due to cerebral arterio- 

sclerosis). 

(б) Vertigo and tinnitus. 

(c) Cerebral haemorrhage and, less commonly, throm- 
bosis. 

{d) Mental symptoms {vide p. 1032). 

(c) Hypertensive encephalopathy {vide p. 798). 

3. Eye. 

(а) Retinal arteriosclerosis. 

(б) Papilloedema. 

4. Renal System. 

{a) Albuminuria and casts. 

(6) Impaired renal function (unusual). 

(c) Uraemia (rare). 

Most of the conditions tabulated above need no further 
discussion in this connection, as they are dealt with elsewhere. 

Retinal Changes with High Blood Pressure. — Owing to 
arteriosclerotic changes the arteries appear narrower than 
usual, are tortuous, and reflect a bright line of hght along their 
course, the so-called ‘‘ silver wire ’’ appearance ; also where 
they cross the veins the latter appear to be constricted. Retinal 
haemorrhages are common, and there are often white areas 
which vary very much in size and number. The degree of impair- 
ment of vision depends mainly on the location of the lesions. 
Hypertensive neuro-retinopathy as seen in malignant hyperten- 
sion and chronic glomerulo -nephritis is described on page 687. 

Treatment and Prognosis of Hypertension. — As we have no 
certain knowledge regarding the aetiology of essential hyper- 
tension and arteriosclerosis, nor of the mechanism by which 
they are produced, it can be imderstood that the situation as 
regards treatment is unsatisfactory. At the best it can be but 
paUiative. 

Attention must be paid to the general regime. Focal 
infection should be dealt with, especially in hyperpiesia. Most 
of the patients wiU be found to be leading too strenuous a life, 
especially as regards mental activity. Although it is not 
usually necessary to advise a complete cessation of business 
activities, the hours of work must be curtailed, and, above all, 
mental fatigue and anxiety must be avoided. Physical strain 
is hable to produce serious s 3 maptoms, but reasonable exercise 
is beneficial ; the amount of exercise advisable is best regulated 
by the patient’s own sensations. 



582 DISEASES OE I'HE CARDtO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

Great stress has been laid on the diet in cases of high blood 
pressure. If the patient is overweight there is often benefit 
from a general limitation of the diet, which produces a loss of 
weight. On the other hand, it is unnecessary and often harmful 
to render life a misery by too strict a dietetic regime. Meat 
should be much curtailed but not omitted ; plenty of fresh 
vegetables and fruit are advisable, as these tend to combat 
constipation ; liquid paraffin is also useful from this point of 
view. The use of alcohol and tobacco should be limited, but 
here again it is unnecessary to render the patient unhappy by 
a complete veto, which in any case is likely to be disregarded. 

While it is necessary to emphasise to the patient the 
importance of adhering strictly to instructions as to regime 
and diet, it is important to prevent a continual concentration 
of his mind on his blood pressure. The use of the sphygmo- 
manometer should be restricted, as too frequent estimations 
lead only to anxiety and give no helpful information. It is 
always imwise to allow the patient to know the exact blood- 
pressure readings. 

No drugs have much permanent effect in reducing a high 
blood pressure, and even were it possible to reduce it to normal, 
it is doubtful whether much benefit would result. Potassium 
iodide, in doses of about 20 gr. a day, has a traditional reputa- 
tion, but its efficacy is probably much overrated, except in 
syphilitic cases. Nitrites reduce the blood pressure temporarily, 
but are only useful in allaying urgent symptoms such as cardiac 
pain. Bromides or luminal may help the patient to sleep and 
to attain that attitude of philosophic cahn which should be 
the object of treatment. In the plethoric type of patient the 
removal of 20 oz. of blood by venesection often produces an 
improvement, and may be repeated at intervals. 

The outlook as regards life is very variable, and all patients 
with a blood pressure of over 200 are precarious lives. A faU 
in the systolic pressure is often an unfavourable sign, as it may 
indicate the onset of cardiac failure. Death may occur at any 
time as the result of cerebral complications or of cardiac failure. 
On the other hand, life is often prolonged for many years even 
with pressures of over 200, so that it is Justifiable to give a 
reasonably good prognosis to the patient himself, though the 
relatives should be warned of the dangers attendant on the 
condition. 

Malignant Hypertension. — ^Whereas in the great majority 
of instances of essential hypertension death occurs from sequelae 
involving the heart or brain, in a small proportion, probably 
less than 6 per cent., the renal arteriolosclerosis is accompanied 



ESSENTIAL HYPERTENSION 683 

by necrosis and endarteritis of the renal arterioles. This 
occurs most often in patients under fifty years of age and some- 
times even in relatively early adult life. The diastolic pressure 
is much elevated, rarely below 130. The clinical picture of 
malignant hypertension is completely different from that of 
other forms of hypertension. The most prominent symptoms 
are those due to increased intracranial pressure, consisting of 
very severe and intractable headache, nausea, and vomiting, 
and sometimes epileptiform convulsions and other nervous 
symptoms as described under the heading of Hypertensive 
Encephalopathy {vide p. 798). On examination papUloedema 
is invariably present, and the C.S.F. pressure is raised to 
250 to 350 mm. of water. The clinical picture may simulate 
a cerebral tumour. In addition to the symptoms due to in- 
creased intracranial pressure, there is a progressive deteriora- 
tion of renal function. Albumen and red cells are found in the 
urine in varying amounts, and the blood urea ultimately rises. 
The specific gravity tends to become fixed at about 1010. 
The renal aspects of malignant h 3 ^rtension are di scussed 
on page 728. In the later stages there is often a tendency to 
haemorrhage, including epistaxis and purpura. 

The outlook in malignant hypertension is for practical 
purposes hopeless. Once severe symptoms have become mani- 
fest death may occur within a few months, though sometimes 
in less acute cases life may be prolonged for several years. 
All treatment, apart from palliative measures for the relief 
of symptoms, is unavailing. 

Dissectino Anetoysm op the Aokta 

In this relatively rare type of aneurysm there is a rupture 
through the intima so that blood is effused into the media, 
the layers of which become split. In most cases the tear into 
the media is situated in the arch of the aorta and the effused 
blood tracks through the media both towards the aortic valves 
and down the descending aorta. The dissection may involve 
the carotids and subclavian, and often extends downwards 
into the abdominal aorta. The condition most often occurs 
in males of middle age and over, who suffer from high blood 
pressure. Sudden exertion, such as lifting a heavy weight, 
appears to be a precipitating cause. Syphilis is not a factor. 

The chief symptom is sudden and very severe pain, most 
often Bubstemal, but sometimes high in ^e epigastrium ; in 
addition there is often vomiting and collapse, and not infre- 
quently the condition may simulate a severe coronary occlusion 



684 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

or even a perforated peptic ulcer. The dissection may spread 
up the carotid and lead to cerebral symptoms. Narrowing 
of the lumen of arteries may cause the disappearance of arterial 
pulsation in the limbs, most often in one or both legs. Owing 
to the loss of blood supply the legs may become cold or even 
appear to be paralysed. 

In about 80 per cent, of cases the condition proves fatal 
within a few days, and sometimes it may be the cause of 
sudden death. Often the effused blood biusts through into 
the pericardium or pleural cavity. 

No treatment is available except morphia and complete 
rest. 


SYPHILIS OF THE AORTA AND AORTIC 
ANEURYSM 

Aneurysms of the thoracic aorta are almost invariably 
syphihtic, as is valvular disease beginning in middle life and 
confined to the aortic valves. Even during the secondary stage 
of syphilis changes are already in progress in the arteries, 
more especially in the aorta and cerebral vessels. 

JStiology. — Though syphilitic aortitis and aneiuysm of the 
aorta occur occasionally in females, the majority of cases are 
males between the ages of forty-five and sixty. As a rule, a 
latent period of approximately twenty years elapses between 
the primary infection and the development of symptoms 
referable to aortic disease. 

Pathology. — The part of the vessel most frequently affected 
by syphilis is the ascending portion and the arch ; less commonly 
the descending thoracic aorta is involved, and syphilitic disease 
of the abdominal aorta is extremely rare. 

In syphilitic aortitis, the primary pathological change con- 
sists in involvement of the minute vessels which supply blood to 
the arterial wall ; these are known as the vasa vasorum. 
Surrounding these are found collections of lymphoid and 
plasma cells, which are sometimes necrotic and resemble 
gummatous nodiiles seen elsewhere. The lumen of the vessels 
is often diminished or obliterated owing to the proliferation of 
the intima. As a result the blood supply to the wall of the aorta 
is deficient, and the more highly specialised tissues — the muscle 
and elastic fibres — degenerate and are replaced by fibrous 
tissue. On microscopical examination the media is found to 
contain irregular strands of fibrous tissue, and the circular 
elastic fibres are fragmented. Possibly as a compensatory 
change due to weakening of the media, the intima is thickened 



SYPHILIS OF AORTA AND AORTIC ANEURYSM 585 


and fibrous. On naked-eye examination the interior of the 
aorta appears wrinkled with fine longitudinal rugae, irregular 
folds, and small nodular swellings. UnUke atheroma, syphilis 
does not produce ulceration or calcification of the intima, 
though atheromatous changes may also be present. 

Similar changes may occur in the aortic valves and cause 
scarring and thickening, which render them incompetent. 
When the process involves the orifices of the coronaries, it 
may lead to narrowing at the point of entry, though the 
S3rphilitic process rarely extends beyond the mouth of the 
coronary vessels. 

As a result of syphilitic aortitis, the vessel loses its elasticity, 
and the strength of the coats of the artery is diminished. The 
fibrous tissue which largely replaces the muscular and elastic 
fibres becomes stretched as the result of the continued arterial 
pressure, and dilatation may occur with the formation of a 
saccular or fusiform aneurysm. The syphilitic origin of aortitis 
of the type described above has been conclusively proved by the 
discovery of the Spirochceta pallida in the walls of the vessel. 

Symptoms of Syphilitic Aortitis. — In its earlier stages 
syphihtic aortitis is usually symptomless, and at autopsy the 
condition is often imexpectedly discovered. In the absence of 
complications, such as aortic regurgitation and aneurysm, the 
most firequent symptom is a sense of substemal oppression ; 
sometimes this may be little more than a feeling of discomfort, 
but it sometimes amounts to pain, which is comparable with 
that of angina pectoris. In fact, in S 3 p)hilitic aortitis the anginal 
syndrome (vide p. 548 ) is not uncommon. The pain and feelings 
of oppression often occur after exertion or excitement, but 
when the condition is well established the attacks may take 
place at any time. In addition attacks of cardiac asthma 
may occur (vide p. 557). 

Physical examination of a patient with S}philitic aortitis 
is often negative. A systolic murmur is occasionally heard, 
presumably due to dilatation of the artery above its point 
of origin. There may be abnormal pulsation in the neck or 
in the suprasternal notch. The diagnosis of the condition 
rests, however, mainly upon the symptoms, a positive Wasser- 
mann reaction, with or without a history of syphilis in earlier 
life, and sometimes a characteristic X-ray appearance of the 
aorta. If aortic regurgitation is present, the physical signs 
associated with that lesion will be detectable. It is often 
possible to demonstrate by radiographic methods a dilatation 
of the aorta which fails to produce definite physical signs. 

It is impossible to lay too much stress on the importance 



586 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

of considering the possibility of syphilis in every non-rheumatic 
patient over forty years of age who develops aortic valvular 
disease or symptoms which might be referable to the aorta. 
Needless to say, if treatment is to be effective it must be begun 
as early as possible, before irreparable damage has occurred, 
such as disease of the valves or aneurysm. 

Aortic Aneurysm 

It has already been shown that aortic aneurysm is but 
an advanced stage of syphilitic aortitis. Although aneurysm 
is almost invariably syphilitic, probably other factors are 
involved in addition. The disease is at least ten times more 
common in men than in women, and this is due to heavier 
muscular work and an increased incidence of syphilis. Whether 
alcohol is a factor is more doubtful. At least 90 per cent, of 
patients suffering from aneurysm of the aorta give a positive 
Wassermann reaction in the blood. 

Aneurysms of the aorta have been classified into three 
pathological types ; saccular, fusiform, and dissecting. 
Saccular aneurysm is due to a localised weakness in the aortic 
wall ; the fibrous tissue graduaUy stretches imtil a sac is 
formed, which may ultimately become larger than a tennis 
ball ; it communicates with the lumen of the aorta by an 
opening which may be comparatively small. In the fusiform 
type of aneurysm there is a general dilatation of the vessel, 
which may involve the ascending aorta and the arch. Dis- 
secting aneurysm is described elsewhere (vide p. 583). 

The signs and symptoms of aneurysm vary with its position, 
size, and rate of enlargement. Aneurysms of the descending 
and abdominal aorta are relatively rare compared with those 
that involve the ascending aorta and the arch. 

Symptoms and Signs. — These are mainly due to pressure 
on surrounding structures, but in addition the patient may 
suffer from pain of an anginal type or attacks of cardiac 
asthma which are due to syphilitic aortitis. As a general 
statement it may be said that aneurysms of the ascending aorta 
and arch produce marked physical signs and relatively few 
symptoms while aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta 
produce severe symptoms with but few physical signs. 

Aneurysm of the Ascending Aorta. — ^When an aneurysm 
occurs close above the valves there is likely to be aortic 
regurgitation, and ultimately rupture into the pericardium 
may occur. If higher up it may press upon the chest wall and 
eventually erode the ribs. There is dulhiess to the right of the 



SYt*HiLlS OY AORTA AND AORTIC ANEURYSM 687 

sternum in the second and third interspaces, and often as the 
aneurysm becomes larger, there may be definite bulging in 
this region, with a tumour showing expansile pulsation. A 
systolic murmur is often heard over the aneurysm. Pain is 
sometimes severe. 

Aneurysm of the Arch. — When the arch of the aorta is 
involved, symptoms and physical signs are as a rule numerous 
and due to pressure on surroimding structures. They may 
be classified as follow's : — 

1. Pressure on the Trachea and Lungs. — The aneurysm 
may become adherent to the trachea and produce a partial 
constriction. In such cases the well-known sign termed 
“ tracheal tug ” can be elicited. The patient is examined 
with the head thrown well back, and the observer’s fingers 
are pressed firmly upon the cricoid cartilage. If tracheal tug 
is present, the cricoid be felt to be drawn downwards 
with each heart beat. Pressure on a main bronchus may lead 
to collapse, infection, or abscess of the lung. Sometimes rupture 
into the lung leads to a fatal haemoptysis, which may be preceded 
by the coughing up of blood-stained sputum. The aneurysm 
may also rupture into the pleural cavity with fatal results. 

2. Pressure on Veins. — Compression of the superior vena 
cava occasionally produces congestion of the face and head, 
and sometimes 6f the arms, or a collateral circulation through 
the mammary and epigastric veins. These phenomena are, 
however, more common with mediastinal tumours than with 
aneurysms. 

3. Pressure on Nerves. — ^The left recurrent laryngeal nerve 
is often involved, and this results in laryngeal irritation or 
paralysis of the left vocal cord. A harsh brassy cough is pro- 
duced by irritation, while a hoarse voice indicates paralysis. 
Sometimes this may be the earliest detectable sign of aneurysm. 
Pressure on the sympathetic at the root of the neck may lead 
to inequality of the pupils and of the palpebral fissures. 

4. Inequality of the Radial Pulses. — If an aneurysm involves 
the origin of the innominate artery or of the left subclavian, 
the mouth of the vessel may be partially obstructed ; hence the 
radial pulses are imequal in volume or are not synchronous. 

5. Pressure on the (Esophagus. — Dysphagia as a result of 
anemysm is very rare, as the oesophagus is usually pushed 
to one side rather than compressed. Rarely rupture occurs 
into the oesophagus with a rapidly fatal result. 

Aneurysm of the Descending Thoracic Aorta. — In these 
cases, which are fortunately comparatively rare, the pre- 
dominant feature is pain due to erosion of the spine, with 



588 DISEASES OP THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

irritation of nerve roots. The bodies of the vertebrae are 
often eroded, but the more resilient intervertebral discss remain 
unabsorbed. The pain is extremely severe and persistent, and 
is felt around the chest and upper abdomen in the course of 
the affected nerves. Physical signs are often indefinite, but 
occasionally a pulsating swelling may be felt over the back, or 
a localised systolic murmur heard ; compression of the lung 
or a bronchus may give tj^ical signs. 

Aneurysm of the Abdominal Aorta —The commonest site 
is immediately below the diaphragm, but the condition is far 
less frequent than is aneurysm of the thoracic aorta. An 
aneurysm high up may produce no palpable tumour, and 
the diagnosis is very difficult or impossible. There is severe 
and persistent epigastric pain, which is unaffected by diet, 
and can only be relieved hy large doses of morphia. Most 
abdominal aneurysms are due to arteriosclerosis rather than 
syphilis. 

Diagnosis. — In many cases of aneurysm the diagnosis is 
obvious from the presence of a pulsating tumour. When in 
doubt, X-ray examination should usually decide the question. 
The patient is best examined erect in the left lateral position. 
If an aneurysm is present, a shadow will be seen encroaching 
on the posterior mediastinum. On examination with the 
fluorescent screen, pulsation can be detected. 

Prognosis. — About 50 per cent, of cases of thoracic aneurysm 
terminate by rupture into the lungs, pleural cavity, pericardium, 
or oesophagus. Death may also occur iBrom cardiac failure or 
respiratory complications If untreated, life is rarely prolonged 
more than a few years, but with anti-syphilitic treatment 
given early the outlook is considerably improved. 

Treatment of Ssrphilitic Aortitis and Aortic Aneurysm. — 
Pathological changes in the aorta begin during the secondary 
stage of syphilis, and thorough treatment during the primary 
and secondary stages of the disease are probably effective in 
d imini s hing the likelihood of the development of aortitis in 
later life. However, even when manifest changes have occurred 
in the aorta, provided the heart is not failing, the progress 
of the disease may be arrested by treatment with potassium 
iodide, bismuth and neoarsphenamine. The patient should be 
kept at rest in bed and take potassium iodide in increasing 
doses up to 120 gr. daily, with intramuscular bismuth (0-1 grm. 
increasing to 0-2 grm.) at weekly intervals ; after four to six 
weeks of treatment intravenous injection of neoarsphenamine 
may be started ; the first dose should be extremely small 
(0*1 grm.), and the dosage must be increased very gradually 



THROMBO-ANGimS OBLITERANS 


58D 


until doses of 0*4 grm. arc being given. If this precaution is 
adopted there is little risk of severe reactions. For severe pain 
morphia may be necessary. 

For the relief of the paroxysmal attacks of dyspnoea which 
occur in syphilitic aortitis, amyl nitrite may be tried, but 
morphia and atropine are often required. 

Aneurysms of Peripheral Vessels 

These may be classified under the following headings : — 

1. Traumatic. — ^These are of considerable importance in 
war wounds and stab wounds with a sharp knife. Under favour- 
able conditions they can be treated surgically provided the 
anastomatic circulation is satisfactory. Proximal and distal 
ligature of the artery and veins is probably better than the 
classical proximal ligature of the artery alone. 

2. Mycotic. — ^In infective endocarditis and pyaemic con- 
ditions, implantation of micro-organisms in the arterial wall 
may lead to a local erosion and weakening of the artery, which 
is hmown as a mycotic aneurysm. These are frequently multiple. 

3. Atherosclerotic. — Peripheral aneurysms especially of the 
popliteal used to be very common and are still seen in elderly 
subjects. They are often multiple. 

4. Syphilitic.T-Such aneurysms may be found in the in- 
nominate and carotid arteries, alone or associated with the 
more common aortic aneurysm. 

6. Intracranial. — ^These are described elsewhere {vide p. 802). 

6. Arterio-venous. — This term is applied to aneurysms in 
which there is communication between an artery and a vein. 
The majority are due to gunshot wounds. The communica- 
tion is sometimes large enough to produce a water-hammer 
type of pulse and enlargement of the heart. The high venous 
pressure resulting from the communication may result in greatly 
distended veins and much swelling of the leg, but it is surprising 
that this does not always occur. The treatment is the same 
as for other traumatic aneurysms. 


THROMBO-ANGimS OBLITERANS 

Thrombo-angiitis obliterans is an inflammatory condition 
which affects the arteries and veins of the Hmbs, and results 
in their occlusion by the formation of a thrombus, which 
eventuaUy undergoes organisation. The disease is practically 
confined to the male sex. Originally described by Buerger as 



590 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

occurring almost entirely among Jews, in England there is no 
special racial incidence. The great majority of the patients 
are between thirty and forty-five years of age. Occasionally 
it appears to have a familial incidence. 

Little is known of the aetiology of the condition. Syphilis 
is certainly not a factor, but there is often a history of 
excessive smoking. From a pathological point of view, the 
primary change is an acute inflammatory condition of all the 
coats of the vessel wall. As a result thrombosis occurs ; later 
the clot becomes organised and the affected vessel forms a 
fibrous cord. Frequently areas of thrombosis may be seen in 
the superficial veins of affected limbs. These form localised 
red areas, which are tender on palpation. 

The symptoms of thrombo-angiitis obliterans are due to 
interference with the blood supply of the affected limbs. The 
onset is usually insidious, and the patient’s first complaint is 
of pain in the calves, which is induced by exercise and relieved 
by rest. Usually one leg is first affected, but in the course of 
time both become involved. In later stages there may be 
severe pain, burning in character, in the feet and legs, quite 
apart from exercise. Localised areas of thrombo-phlebitis 
may also occur. Less commonly, the disease may involve 
the arms. The patient is able to walk a certain distance, often 
not more than a hundred yards, without discomfort, and is 
then compelled to stop by the onset of pain in the calves ; 
after a few minutes’ rest the symptoms disappear, and he is 
able to walk a httle further, until the pain returns. This 
group of symptoms is known as intermittent davdication, but 
in itself it is not characteristic of thrombo-angiitis obUterans, 
in fact, considerably the most common cause of intermittent 
claudication is arteriosclerosis. As the disease progresses the 
distance which the patient can walk before the onset of pain 
gradually decreases. 

On examination of the affected leg, the pulses in the posterior 
tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries caimot be felt, and the foot is 
livid while in the dependent position. By elevating the limb 
towards the perpendicular when the patient is lying down, 
ischaemia of the extremity is produced, and the s kin becomes 
blanched. After some years trophic changes occur in the skin, 
and ultimately dry gangrene may result. 

Occasionally thrombo-angiitis obliterans is associated with 
erythromeUdgia, a rare condition in which there is pain, redness 
and swelling in the feet or hands, particularly when the limb is 
in a dependent position. 

Treatment and PrognotU. — ^Ih few diseases have so many 



THROMBO ANGIITIS OBLITERANS 591 

different treatments, both medical and surgical, been advocated. 
Unfortunately there is little evidence that genuine or permanent 
improvement results from any one of them. Undoubtedly 
rest in bed is beneficial, but relapse usually occurs when the 
patient tries to resume a normal life. Often radiant heat 
or diathermy relieves the pain. The following methods of 
treatment have been advised : — 

1. Buerger's Passive Exercises, — The affected limb is 
elevated to about 60 degrees above the horizontal and is allowed 
to rest in this position for the minimum time necessary to 
produce blanching (usually ^ to 3 minutes). The foot is then 
allowed to hang down imtil reactionary hypersemia or rubor 
sets in (usually 2 to 5 minutes). The limb is then allowed to 
rest in a horizontal position for about 5 minutes and the cycle 
is then repeated. The exercises are carried out for one hour at 
a time and should be repeated several times daily. The object 
is to promote collateral circulation. 

2. Protein Shock Therapy. — Fever is produced by the 
intravenous injection of a t3^hoid vaccine (5 to 50 million 
organisms). The object of the treatment is to produce vaso- 
dilatation of the extremities. Unfortunately arterial thrombosis 
occasionally occurs with disastrous results. 

3. AUemate Suction and Pressure. — The limb is enclosed in 
an airtight chamber and subjected to alternate negative and 
positive pressures. The apparatus required is elaborate but 
favourable results are claimed after prolonged treatment. 

4. Surgical Treatment. — Periarterial sympathectomy and 
ligation of the femorcJ vein have both proved useless, but 
sometimes favourable resxilts have followed lumbar ganglion- 
ectomy, especially when vasospasm is present apart from 
organic obliteration of the vessels. 

When pain in the foot is severe, a peripheral nerve block 
with alcohol or section of the sensory nerve produces anaesthesia 
for about six months and often gives great relief. 

When gangrene occurs, especially if it is complicated by 
infection, amputation high up may be required. 

No drugs have any specific action but beneficial results have 
been claimed for alcohol, injection of ttesue extracts, thyroid, 
acetylcholine and other substances. It is most important to 
avoid trauma to the feet and particularly bums by hot-water 
bottles. The patient may live for many years and occasionally 
spontaneous cure may occur, but in the majority of cases in spite 
of all forms of treatment the condition grewiually deteriorates. 
Death may occur from intercurrent illnesses or toxic absorption 
from gangrene. 



592 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO -VASCULAR SYSTEM 


Periarteritis Nodosa 

Polyarteritis (periarteritis) nodosa is an uncommon com- 
plaint with prolonged fever, nodular swellings, and in some 
cases small aneurysms. As arteries in almost any part of the 
body may be aflEected, the symptomatology is very varied. 
Young adults, especially men, are the main victims. 

The medium-sized arteries are generally affected, especially 
of the heart, kidneys, and intestines. There is an acute local 
inflammation through all the coats of the artery with necrosis 
of the wall and often with thrombi in the lumen ; aneurysms 
may develop. There may be infiltration with leucocytes and 
plasma cells and sometimes with eosinophils. Yellowish- 
white nodules up to the size of a pea may be visible on 
the arteries. 

The acute illness may simulate nephritis or rheumatic 
carditis but the early symptoms may be protean, including a 
cough and asthmatic attacks. Later in some cases, nodular 
swellings, which may later ulcerate, may be felt in the sub- 
cutaneous tissues ; imless these are present and biopsy reveals 
their nature, the diagnosis may not be made before death. It 
is realised now that though the infection may continue for 
months, some cases recover, and therefore the diagnosis should 
be thought of when there is long continued fever and an obscure 
and varied illness with signs of arterial involvement. The 
treatment is symptomatic. 


VASOMOTOR DISORDERS 
Raynaud’s Disease 

This term is applied to a condition in which the fingers and 
toes are affected by an intermittent spasm of the arteries, 
which may ultimately reduce the blood supply to such an 
extent that gangrene results. 

iEtiology* — ^Nothing definite is known of the factors that 
produce Raynaud’s disease. It occurs far more commonly in 
females than in males, and the onset of symptoms is usually 
before middle age. No constant pathological changes are found 
either in the central nervous system or in the vessels of the 
affected areas, and it is assumed that the manifestations of the 
disease are due to vascular spasm. In long-standing cases 
the vessels show intimal thickening with narrowing of the 
lumen. 



RAYNAUD’S DISEASE 


693 


Symptoms. — ^The changes seen in Raynaud’s disease are 
always symmetrical, usually aflFect both hands and feet, and are 
always worst in cold weather. Two stages are described : — 

1. Local Asphyxia , — ^This most commonly affects the fingers 
and toes, which become cold and numb, and closely resemble 
the condition which may be brought about by severe cold. The 
vasoconstriction which produces such symptoms may last from 
a few minutes to several hours. The fingers, toes, and some- 
times the ears and nose become intensely livid and congested ; 
pain is often severe, and the affected parts may become 
insensitive to touch. When massaged in an attempt to restore 
circulation they become dead-white, thus in the case of the 
fingers giving rise to the term ‘‘ dead fingers.” 

2. Local Oangrene . — The cold asphyxiated parts become 
anaesthetic, and black in colour as gangrene sets in. Usually 
the occurrence of gangrene is limited to the tips of the fingers 
and toes. 

Diagnosis. — Vasomotor phenomena in the fingers when 
exposed to cold often result in a condition of pallor and numb- 
ness, which resemble the stage of local syncope in Raynaud’s 
disease. Whether this condition, which is often familial, 
should really be classed as mild Raynaud’s disease is doubtful. 
In many cases the tendency to “ dead fingers ” persists through 
life, and no other symptoms of the disease develop. 

There is little risk of confusion between Raynaud’s disease 
and the gangrene due either to arteriosclerosis or to thrombo- 
angiitis obliterans. Raynaud’s disease is invariably sym- 
metrical and affects chiefly females, while gangrene due to 
either arteriosclerosis or thrombo-angiitis is most often met 
with in males and is primarily unilateral. Intermittent 
claudication is a prominent feature in the two latter conditions 
and does not occur in Raynaud’s disease. 

Treatment. — No specific treatment is available, but some- 
times calcium lactate in 16-gr. doses thrice daily appears to be 
helpful. Affected limbs should be kept at rest warmly wrapped 
in cotton- wool. Permanent residence in a warm climate is 
often, beneficial. Stripping of the periarterial sheaths, often 
fallaciously termed periarterial sympathectomy, is of no value, 
but cervical ganglionectomy may result in conspicuous 
improvement. 

Angio-neurotic (Edema 

In this remarkable but not very imcommon condition, 
circumscribed areas of oedema occur upon the skin and mucous 
membranes. Any part of the body may be affected, but most 
38 



594 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

conunonly the face. The swellings appear spontaneously and 
are sometimes preceded by itching or burning sensations ; 
their duration varies from a few hours to several days, but 
both the onset and disappearance of the oedema are remarkably 
rapid. Usually there are no symptoms beyond local dis- 
comfort, due to the swelling of the skin, but sometimes the 
attacks are complicated by severe abdominal pain and vomiting, 
which may simulate an acute abdominal condition. The 
abdominal symptoms are probably due to circumscribed oedema 
of the mucous membrane in the alimentary tract. If the glottis 
is affected there is a risk of death from suffocation. 

The origin of the disease is unknown, but it is usually 
regarded as allergic or as a vasomotor neurosis. In many 
instances it is certainly hereditary or familial, and Osier records 
one family in which five generations were affected. The 
resemblance between the condition and urticaria suggests the 
possibility that food allergy is a factor. 

The treatment of angio-neurotic oedema is unsatisfactory, 
particularly in patients with a family history of the disease. 
When the glottis is affected, immediate tracheotomy may be 
needed. Calcium lactate may be tried, but is usually ineffective. 
Adrenalin usually gives rapid but temporary relief. 


Mileoy’s Disease 

This disease is also known as Hereditary CEdema, and is 
nearly always hereditary or familial in origin. The swelling is 
confined to the legs, which may be enlarged up to the thighs ; 
the feet are rarely involved. It is sometimes unilateral. The 
oedema does not pit markedly on pressure, and there is no 
evidence of venous or lymphatic obstruction. The condition 
is painless and the general health remains unaffected, though 
the great weight of the limbs interferes with normal activity. 
The firm application of crepe bandages diminishes the swelling 
and gives much relief. Treatment, both medical and surgical, 
is ineffective. 


A0BOPAB.SSTHBSIA 

In this condition numbness, tingling, or '' pins and needles ” 
occur in 4he finger-tips without physical signs suggesting 
organic nervous disease. It occurs most frequently at the 
menopause in emotionally unstable women. Treatment is 
usually of little avail but radiant heat and massage may be 
tried. Thyroid often proves of considerable value. 



DISEASES OP THE CARDIO -VASCULAR SYSTEM 595 


DISEASES OF THE VEINS 
Thrombosis 

Inflammation or trauma of the wall of a vein leads to a 
local deposition of blood platelets and the formation of a clot 
(thrombus). Inflammation of a vein (phlebitis) may be of 
two kinds, plastic or suppurative, which differ widely in the 
symptoms produced. 

Suppurative Phlebitis. — This condition is always most 
serious. The wall of the vein is infected firom some adjoining 
focus of suppuration, and the thrombus which forms within 
the vein rapidly breaks down, and its infected fragments are 
discharged into the general venous circulation. This results 
in pyaemia and secondary abscesses, most often in the lungs. 

Sinus Thrombosis is described elsewhere {vide p. 821). 

Suppuration in the abdomen, particularly around the 
appendix, may lead to a suppurative pylephlebitis and multiple 
abscesses in the liver {vide p. 464). 

Plastic Phlebitis . — In this condition a thrombus forms, 
which may ultimately undergo organisation, and the vein 
becomes a fibrous cord, or canalisation of the clot may open 
new channels for the flow of blood. 

iEtiology. — Phlebitis or thrombo-phlebitis, as it is often 
termed, occurs not infrequently without any obvious cause, 
and is more common in the veins of the legs than elsewhere. 
Possibly its onset is often due to focal infection, which may 
be quite unsuspected. Thrombosis of the femoral vein is a 
relatively firequent complication of typhoid fever or, indeed, 
of any severe general infection such as pneumonia ; in such 
cases the left femoral vein is almost always the one which 
becomes thrombosed. Following parturition a similar condition 
may occur — phlegmasia alba dolens or “ white leg.” In 
addition to the above, thrombo-phlebitis has been attributed 
to many other diseases, particularly gout. Thrombosis of 
veins also occurs after operations, particularly pelvic operations. 

Symptoms. — These will naturally vary with the site of the 
thrombosis. Local pain and tenderness are the earliest and 
most prominent features. When the affected vein is superficial 
there is obvious redness and oedema, but on no account should 
any attempt be made to palpate the vein. Thrombosis of a 
large vein, such as the femoral, produces marked swelling and 
oedema of the limb, which lasts from several* weeks to many 
months or even years. 

Some degree of pyrexia is common, but the general symptoms 



596 DISEASES OF THE CARDIO-VASCULAR SYSTEM 

are slight, in marked contrast to suppurative phlebitis. The 
local pain persists for some days and then gradually subsides. 
Non-suppurative phlebitis has a good prognosis, provided a 
portion of clot does not become detached. Such an accident 
will produce a pulmonary embolism which may be fatal. 

Treatment. — Complete rest and immobilisation of the 
thrombosed area are essential. For the pain, sedatives such as 
aspirin, bromides, chloral, or even morphia may be required. 
Sodium citrate is sometimes given with the idea of preventing 
further thrombosis, but its value is problematical. Immobilisa- 
tion of the affected part must be insisted on for at least four 
weeks, and massage or palpation must be forbidden during 
the same period owing to the danger of detaching a clot into 
the circulation. When there is no obvious cause for the 
phlebitis, and particularly if thromboses have been multiple, 
any possible source of sepsis should be eradicated. 

Thrombo-phlebitis Migrans. — In this condition multiple 
thromboses occur, usually successively, in different parts of the 
body. In addition to the systemic veins those in the lungs 
may be affected and produce pleurisy and pleural effusion. 
Even a coronary vessel may be involved. The condition is 
often accompanied by pyrexia of moderate degree and may 
last for many months. Often this syndrome occurs aa a 
secondary manifestation in carcinoma, particularly in carcinoma 
of the lung. Multiple venous thromboses also occur in thrombo- 
angiitis obliterans. 

Pulmonary Embolism. — Whenever thrombosis occurs in a 
vein there is a risk of a portion of clot becoming detached. 
Should this occur, the thrombus passes through the right 
side of the heart and is eventually arrested at some point 
in the pulmonary artery or its branches. A large embolus 
may lodge at the bifurcation of the pulmonary artery and 
completely stop the circulation of blood through the lungs. 
Such accidents occur most often about seven to ten days after 
operations. The patient, who is usually convalescent, suddenly 
sits up in bed, becomes unconscious and convulsed, and is 
dead within a few minutes. There is no cyanosis, and the 
colour is that of a “ white asphyxia.*' Smaller emboli may 
occlude small l)ranche8 of the artery and produce localised 
infarctions of the lung. In such an event there is sudden 
onset of pain in the chest, dyspnoea, and later slight haemoptysis 
and a localised pleural rub. Sometimes a pleural effusion 
develops, and is often blood-stained. If a patient with 
pulmonary embolism survives the first twelve hours, recovery 
is probable. Oxygen given through a mask or nasal catheter is 



ARTERIAL EMBOLISM 


697 


extremely valuable, and morphia may be required to allay 
pain and restlessness. Very rarely pulmonary embolectomy 
has been successful. 

Small pulmonary emboli, which produce localised areas of 
pleurisy, may result from thrombosis in varicose veins. 

Arterial Embolism. — Emboli in the systemic arteries are 
derived from three main sources : (1) portions of thrombus 
from the left auricle ; (2) mural thrombi in the left ventricle 
after coronary thrombosis ; and (3) detached vegetations from 
the mitral and aortic valves. The latter accident is unusual 
except in infective endocarditis, but arterial embolism from 
(lot formed in the left auricle is relatively common in association 
with mitral stenosis, especially when there is also auricular 
fibrillation. Emboli are specially common in the cerebrum, in 
the spleen, and in the kidneys, but may also occur in the 
mesenteric vessels, where the picture may simulate an acute 
abdomen, or in the arteries of the leg (less commonly the arm), 
or even at the bifurcation of the aorta. 

The occurrence of hemiplegia after cerebral embolism is 
well recognised but the occurrence of monoplegias of short 
duration and of other cerebral disturbances is less well known. 
With splenic infarcts sharp pain may be the main symptom 
and the spleen may be palpable and tender. In the kidney 
pain and haematuria may lead to a suspicion of other diagnoses. 

In the larger vessels an embolism may disintegrate after a 
short time, leading to relief or diminution of symptoms. The 
recovery may be surprisingly complete, and arterial embol- 
ectomy even when possible should not be undertaken lightly. 

Maurice Campbell. 

J. J. CONYBEARE. 



DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY 

SYSTEM 


Physical Signs 

S KJLL in the detection and interpretation of physical signs 
in the chest can be obtained only by practical instruction 
and experience. Accordingly it is not proposed to describe 
individual physical signs. Those, however, which are likely to 
be encountered in cases of the more important respiratory 
disorders will be enumerated, and where necessary their 
significance will be discussed, under the various appropriate 
headings. 


DISEASES OF THE NOSE 

The Common Cold. — This usuaUy originates in the naso- 
pharynx one to five days after exposure to infection, and 
may spread to ac cessory sinuses, Eustachian tubes and middle 
ear, the larynx, and occasionally the trachea, bronchi, and 
lungs. The onset is often indicated by a sensation of chilliness 
which is followed by malaise, listlessness, and naso-pharyngeal 
catarrh. Headache is common and the digestion may be 
disturbed. The course varies with the severity of infection and 
the resistance of the individual, and the duration varies from 
a few days to some weeks. 

JStiology . — The liability to infectious catarrh of the upper 
air passages is common to all ages and races, but is relatively 
rare in infants and the aged. Exposure to infection is the 
essential factor, as shown by the freedom from colds in members 
of Arctic and Antarctic expeditions while out of touch with 
other communities. Undue exposure to cold and wet weather 
may often, however, be a precipitating factor. 

Bacteriology . — It seems probable that a filterable virus, as 
yet unidentified, is the primary cause of the common cold. 
Secondary infection with bacteria quickly follows. Thus, on 
culture from a nasopharyngeal swab many different organisms 

598 



DISEASES OE THE NOSE 599 

may be found and these may be responsible later for various 
complications. 

Pathology , — Catarrh is the manifestation of inflammatory 
reaction on a mucous membrane. There occurs hyperaemia 
and a local invasion by leucocytes. The latter exude fe)m the 
surface together with mucous cells and large quantities of 
mucin. 

Prevention , — Some individuals are much more frequently 
attacked than others. In many cases this is due to local defects 
in the nose or throat ; mouth breathers are notoriously un- 
resistant. Other predisposing causes are imventilated rooms 
and excessive clothing. Above all, close contact with a sufferer 
in the active stage of the disease is to be avoided. It is the 
manifest duty of the latter to isolate himself during the first 
three days of the disease, and to avoid close contact and kissing 
until the catarrh hae cleared up completely. Of prophylactic 
value are general ultra-violet light baths given throughout the 
winter. Increasing exposures up to twenty minutes for each 
bath may be taken twice weekly. Inoculations of anti-catarrhal 
vaccine if given over a period in the autumn and winter may 
also be of assistance and diminish the risk of complications. 

Treatment , — A cold may sometimes be aborted by the use 
of a spray of patulin (1 in 10,000) applied four-hourly to the 
nose and throat. A hot bath, hot drinks, and rest in bed for 
twenty-four hours is suitable for most cases. On the first 
night sweating should be promoted by sleeping wTapped in a 
blanket and surrounded by several hot- water bottles. Opium 
in the form of Dover’s powder (5 to 10 gr.) is a favourite remedy, 
as is 10 gr. of aspirin. 

Swelling of the mucosa may be controlled by instilling 
into the nostrils every three hours drops of a preparation made 
by dissolving four grains of ephedrine in an ounce of saline. 
The discomfort of nasal obstruction may be further relieved by 
inhalations of benzedrine. 

Chronic Catarrhal Bhinitis. — Etiology , — In patients with 
a low resistance, chronic rhinitis may follow a series of colds. 
More frequently the underlying cause is nasal obstruction, the 
presence of adenoids or chronic infection of an accessory nasal 
sinus. 

Symptoms, — ^The symptoms are discharge of watery or 
mucoid secretion from the nostrils, and nasal obstruction. 
Secondary effects may be pharyngitis, laryngitis, and middle 
ear disease. The mucous membrane of the nose is swollen, 
especially on the turbinates. At first it is red and soft ; later 
it may Income pale and tough. 



600 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

Treatment, — Local causes, such as adenoids, polypi, or gross 
deviation of the septum, may need operative interference. In 
the absence of these, treatment aims at raising the patient’s resist- 
ance. Most beneficial, especially for town-dwellers, is a change 
of climate. An autogenous vaccine prepared from organisms 
found on a post-nasal swab is effective in some cases. 

Epistazis. — Epistaxis, or bleeding from the nose, is common 
in young children and in the elderly. In the former, it is usually 
due to some local cause such as acute rhinitis or trauma, while 
in old age it is more often due to remote causes such as benign 
hypertension, chronic nephritis, and hepatic cirrhosis. It 
occurs also in association with valvular disease of the heart, 
and various forms of anaemia, uraemia, purpura, and scurvy. 
It is a common symptom in the early stage of enteric fever. 

The bleeding arises as a rule from vessels on the anterior 
part of the nasal septum. In patients suffering from hyper- 
piesis, heart disease, or uraemia it may be beneficial ; in others 
the loss of blood may do serious harm. Epistaxis is common 
in hereditary telangiectasia {vide p. 3^i7). 

In order to step the bleeding, the patient should be kept 
still with the head raised. An ice-bag is applied to the back 
of the neck, and the nostril plugged with cotton-wool soaked 
in solution of adrenalin 1 in 2,000. 

Intractable epistaxis is best controlled by a pneumatic 
plug. This consists of an india-rubber finger-stall, inside which 
is sealed the end of a soft catheter. The finger-staU is inserted 
into the nose, and inflated through the catheter, which is then 
clamped. If bleeding continue from a localised area, cauterisation 
with an electric cautery or a stick of silver nitrate should be tried. 
Blood transfusion may occasionally be required. 


DISEASES OF THE TONSILS 

Acute Tonsillitis^ — Etiology . — This may occur sporadically 
or in epidemics ; the sporadic variety is seen chiefly in persons 
with chronic enlargement of the lymphoid tissue of the throat. 
Epidemics are common in institutions, especially hospitals. 
The causative organism varies but is often a haemolytic 
streptococcus which is directly communicated from case to case. 
The disease, though common in children and young adults, is 
rarely seen in infants or the aged. 

Morbid Appearance , — ^The tonsils become red and swollen, 
the crypts fill with exudate and debris which project firom 
the orifices as pale cheesy masses. The exudate from several 



DISEASES OF THE TONSILS 601 

crypts may coalesce to form a yellowish-grey patch. The 
surrounding pharynx is more or less inflamed. 

Symptoms . — ^There is a sudden onset with chiU, aching pain 
in the back, and headache. The temperature may rise to 104° 
on the first day. The face is pale, breath offensive, tongue 
heavily coated. The cervical lymph glands may become 
tender and enlarged. The urine is concentrated and sometimes 
contains a trace of albumen. The throat feels sore and there 
is pain on swallowing. 

As a rule, the temperature falls after three or four days 
and health is quickly restored. Serious complications, such as 
septicsemia, acute otitis media, acute nephritis, acute rheuma- 
tism and rheumatic carditis may occur, especially in children. 
Less serious complications are a diffuse erythema simulating 
scarlet fever, fibrositis, and erythema nodosum. 

Diagnosis . — The most certain method of distinguishing 
tonsillitis from diphtheria is by bacteriological examination 
which wiU establish the causal organism, and which should, 
whenever possible, be a routine investigation for these cases. 
However, in diphtheria a firm ashy-grey membrane forms, 
more commonly on one than on both tonsils, soon extends to 
the faucial pillars and uvula, and is fairly sharply limited in 
extent, whereas the exudate of follicular tonsillitis is loose and 
yellow, involves both tonsils diffusely and rarely extends 
beyond them. When diphtheria is suspected, treatment must 
not be delayed pending the report on a swab. Cervical adenitis 
is more striking in diphtheria than in tonsillitis. 

Treatment . — The patient should be kept in bed and the 
diet limited to liquids and jellies. Free action of the bowels 
should be obtained by means of calomel and salines. The 
throat may be gently swabbed with glycerinum iodi twice 
daily, and powdered aspirin may be insufflated to relieve pain. 
If sleep is disturbed, Dover’s powder, 5 to 10 gr., may be 
given at night. A mixture containing potassium chlorate and 
sodimn salicylate may be given thrice daily (sod. salicyl. gr. x, 
sod. bicarb, gr. xv, pot. chlorat. gr. v, syrupus aurant 38s, 
aq. ad Jss). Chemotherapy should not be employed as a routine 
measure in these cases. If the infecting orgamsm is shown to be 
susceptible it may sometimes be desirable to give the appro- 
priate drug in full doses, e.y., sulphapyridine, 1 J-grm. doses fom*- 
hourly for two days then 1 grm. t.d.s. for two days for an adult. 

Vincent’s Angina. — .Etiology . — ^This is an ulcero-membranous 
affection of the throat and mouth, due to combined infection 
with the fusiform bacillus and spirillum of Vincent. Infection 
can be transmitted by drinking utensils. 



602 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

Symptoms . — ^The lesions may be multiple, resembling 
foUioular tonsillitis, or a single “ wash-leather patch ” may 
form on one tonsil. The patch is raised and irregular, and 
bleeding occurs when the slough is detached. The membrane 
may spread to the fauces or along the gums. The cervical 
glands enlarge on the side afiected. The breath is offensive, 
dysphagia is common, but pyrexia and constitutional disturb- 
ance are very variable. In some oases the slough separates 
after a few days, and the ulcer quickly heals. In others the 
lesion persists for many weeks. 

Diagnosis . — The spirillum, together with the fusiform 
bacillus, may be identified by microscopical examination of a 
smear, although it does not grow on ordinary culture media. 
The lesion may simulate diphtheria, but there is not the same 
constitutional disturbance. A similar appearance is sometimes 
seen in agranulocytosis, glandular fever and in the phar 3 mgeal 
necrosis associated with the leuksemias. The chronic form may 
resemble the mucous patch or tertiary ulcer of syphilis. In 
cases of difficulty the Wassermaim reaction should be done. 

Prog7iosis . — There is no danger except when Vincent’s angina 
supervenes on scarlet fever, diphtheria, or some other acute 
fever. 

Treatment . — ^An abundant varied diet is essential. Extra 
vitamin B, (nicotinic acid, 250 mg. daily) and vitamin C 
may be of help. If there is severe ulceration of the tonsil or 
persistent gingivitis the oral administration of acetarsol (1 to 
4 gr. adults, ^ gr. children) or intravenous injection of 
neoarsphenamine may be required, in addition to an iodine 
mouthwash. In chronic cases, diseased teeth should be 
extracted. 

Peri-tonsillitis or Quinsy. — Mtiology. — K quinsy is generally 
preceded by acute tonsillitis, and residts from the inflammation 
spreading to the tissues outside the capsule of the tonsil. 

Symptoms . — The condition is generally unilateral, and the 
swelling pushes the tonsil amd soft palate downwards. An 
abscess forms, and if not incised may burst in four to six days. 
At first the patient complains of sore throat and great pain on 
swallowing. Later the cervical glands enlarge and Hie jaw 
becomes l^ed. Cases have ended fatally ficom oedema of the 
larynx, from suffocation brought about by bursting of the 
abscess during sleep, or from haemorrhage. 

Treatment. — In the early stages this is the same as that for 
acute tonsillitis. Sometimes a quinsy may be aborted by intra- 
muscular injection of anti-streptococcal serum or by giving 
BulphanUamide. As soon as pus has formed, it shotdd be 



603 


DISEASES OF THE TONSILS 

evacuated. The soft palate is painted with cocaine, and a 
guarded bistoury is thrust into it at the point of maximum 
swelling above the tonsil. A hot compress to the neck affords 
some relief. 

Chronic Tonsillitis. — In many children the tonsils enlarge 
during the period of decay of the milk teeth. This enlargement 
may persist as a simple hjrpertrophy in conjunction with adenoid 
overgrowth, and accentuate the obstruction due to the latter. 
Removal of the adenoids and establishment of nose breathing 
will often bring about subsidence of the h3Tpertrophy. 

Chronic Septic Tonsillitia is to be distinguished from the 
above. In this variety the tonsils are not necessarily larger 
than normal, and in some instances they are contracted and 
fibrous. The crypts are filled with offensive cheesy material 
consisting of epithehal cells, pus cells, and organisms. In 
some cases concretions form, known as tonsilloHths. 

Symptoms, — Locally the condition gives rise to frequent 
‘‘ sore throats and enlargement of cervical glands. Con- 
stitutional disturbance is shown by bouts of p5rrexia, anaemia, 
dyspepsia, and sometimes by fibrositis or polyarthritis. 

Treatment, — Carious teeth should be extracted and other 
septic foci about the mouth and nose must be eradicated. If 
the tonsils do not regain a healthy appearance, but still harbour 
material after the above measures have been carried out and a 
suitable period allowed for recovery, then the tonsils should be 
enucleated. The tonsils are useful organs and form part of the 
defence against infection ; they should be sacrificed, therefore, 
only when it becomes clear that they cannot be restored to a 
healthy condition. 

Agranulocytic Angina. — Vide p. 362. 

Adenoid Vegetations 

jEtiology. — The condition occurs in children, chiefly between 
the ages of three and six years, but is met with occasionally 
in young infants. It is especially common in England, perhaps 
owing to the cold, damp climate. 

Morbid Appearance, — ^The vegetations form a foliated mass 
on the roof of the nasopharynx. They may extend down the 
lateral walls, cover the openings of the Eustachian tubes, and 
partially occlude the posterior choanee. The l3miphoid masses 
are covered by squamous or columnar epitheUum, and there is 
usually an associated hypertrophy of the tonsils, and cervical 
cuienitis. 

Symptoms, — As a result of post-nasal obstruction, the child 



604 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

becomes a mouth breather. The “ adenoid facies ” is character- 
ised by the open mouth, projecting upper lip, narrowed nostrils, 
and high-arched palate. Associated developmental abnor- 
malities of the chest occur, including “ pigeon ” and “ funnel ” 
breast. 

Other symptoms of adenoids are backward mentality and 
inability to concentrate, impairment of hearing, headache, 
night terrors, and enuresis. Children having this complaint 
are especially liable to recurrent colds, chronic ton^llitis, 
otitis media, and chronic bronchitis. 

TreatmenL — This is surgical, the adenoids being removed 
by means of a curette. After operation, breathing exercises 
should be practised in order to teach the child to breathe 
through the nose. (>Dd-hver oil should be taken together with 
a good mixed diet, and exercise in the open air encouraged. 


DISEASES OF THE LARYNX 

Acute Catarrhal Laryngitis. — ^Etiology , — This condition may 
be due to the same causes as acute rhinitis ; it also follows 
inhalation of hot or irritating vapours. An attack may be 
provoked by over-use of the voice as in shouting. It is a 
common symptom in measles and influenza, and may occur 
in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis quite apart from 
tuberculous ulceration of the lar^Tix. 

Morbid Appearance . — The mucous lining of the larynx is 
swollen and hyperaemic ; the cords are pink or red, and there 
is usually infiltration of the submucosa and muscles resulting in 
lack of tension of the cords in phonation. The sputum is 
viscid and may be streaked with blood. 

Symptoms . — In an adult the chief complaints are of partial 
or complete loss of voice, an irritating cough, and a feeling 
of soreness in the larynx. There may be slight pyrexia and 
malaise. In the majority of cases the symptoms pass off in 
the course of one or two weeks. 

In the child there are dangers due to the comparative 
narrowness of the glottis and the tendency to reflex spasm. 
During the day the symptoms are seldom alarming, but at 
night the child may wake in a terror with loud crowing inspira- 
tion (laryngitis stridulosa), urgent dyspnoea, and cyanosis. 

Treatment . — The patient should remain in bed, be forbidden 
to speak, guarded from draughts, and the atmosphere of the 
room should be kept moist by means of a steam-kettle. Com- 
pound tincture of benzoin may be added to the water in the 



DISEASES OF THE LARYNX 605 

kettle, 1 dr. to the pint, or steam inhalations of this taken for 
five minutes three times daily. The cough should be checked 
by a sedative linctus or lozenge. In children, reUef may be 
obtained from hot compresses to the front of the neck, and by 
a mixture containing 1 gr. of potassium antimony tartrate, or 
by gr. apomorphine, injected hypodermically. The child 
should take small doses of chloral and potassium bromide. 
In extreme cases intubation or tracheotomy may be necessary. 

Membranous Larsmgitis. — This is almost always diphtheritic, 
though rarely it occurs with other acute infections. The case 
should be treated as one of diphtheria even in the absence of 
bacteriological confirmation. 

(Edema ol the Larynx. .Etiology --Jjocal causes include 
acute and chronic infections, mechanical or chemical trauma, 
or spread of infection from, for example, celluhtis of the neck. 
General causes are nephritis, which accounts for over 10 per 
cent, of cases, other conditions capable of producing anasarca, 
such as heart failure and lardaceous disease, iodine sensitivity, 
or an attack of angio-neurotic oedema in the tissues of the larynx. 

Morbid Anatomy . — The oedema affects chiefly the loose 
submucosa of the epiglottis, the aryepiglottic folds, and the 
ventricular bands ; the vocal cords are little affected. In 
the septic cases the fluid is purulent, in the others serous. 

Symptoms . — ^The patient complains of a feeling as though 
there were a foreign body in the throat. There is difficulty in 
swallowing, the voice becomes muffled, and at any time 
obstruction may ensue with inspiratory stridor. With the 
larjmgosoope the mucous membrane looks pale and tense, the 
epiglottis swollen and erect, and the aryepiglottic folds form 
ovoid tumours. Without a laryngoscope these swellings may 
be detected by examination with the finger. The onset may 
be sudden, and fatal obstruction may occur in less than half 
an hour ; in other oases the condition arises gradually, but 
even m these there is danger of a sudden exacerbation. 

Treatment . — ^The patient is put to bed, and the air kept 
moist by means of a steam-kettle. Fluids may be given by 
rectum. To prevent spasm, atropine and potassium bromide 
are given every fom hours. Pilocarpin, J gr. injected thrice 
at intervals of twenty minutes, has led to rapid relief. The 
oedematous parts may be incised, but if dyspnoea develop, 
tracheotomy should be performed without delay. 

In oases due to angioneurotic oedema a subcutaneous 
injection of 7 minims of a solutin of adrenalin should be 
given ; and a spray of 5 per cent, cocaine and adrenalin 
may be used subsequently. 



606 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

In OBdema due to iodism, large doses of sodium bicarbonate 
should be given. 

Chronic Laryngitis. — Etiology , — This may supervene on 
acute catarrhal laryngitis, or it may be caused by chronic sepsis 
in the nose, adenoids, the tonsils, or mouth. Other factors are 
over-indulgence in alcohol or tobacco. It is also caused by 
faulty voice production in those who speak in public, c.gr., 
“ clergyman's throat,” and is common in costermongers, 
actors, and singers. 

Symptoms frequent irritable cough and scanty viscid 
sputum are present ; the voice is husky or there may be 
aphonia. The loss of voice is usually most complete in the 
mornings, and phonation becomes easier when the patient has 
used the voice for a time, neither of which features occur in 
hysterical aphonia. 

With the laryngoscope, in the slighter cases, the cords are 
seen to have lost their clear white definition, and to be slightly 
swollen. In more advanced cases the mucous membrane of 
the larynx may show local or general thickening, or the cords 
themselves may be thick and irregular, as described by Virchow 
under the name pachydermia laryngls. 

Diagnosis , — In every case the possibility of tuberculous 
laryngitis (vide p. 134) must be borne in mind, and careftd 
examination of the Iimgs and sputum should be made. In 
patients above the age of forty, the condition may be due to 
carcinoma. In this case the tliickening and impaired mobility 
will be for the most part unilateral. 

Treatment . — The voice must be rested, and sepsis in the 
nose, throat, and mouth eradicated. Alcohol and tobacco are 
forbidden. A change of climate is often of great value. CJough 
is subdued by administration of codeine, taken in \ gr. tablets. 
In severe cases it may be necessary to paint the cords with 
astringent solutions. 

Syphilis of the Larynx. — Syphilitic changes in the larynx 
are by no means rare. Secondary syphilis may give rise to a 
mild catarrhal condition, but tertiary lesions are much more 
serious. They usually take the form of gununata in the sub- 
mucous tissue at the base of the epiglottis, and may break down, 
leaving deep ulcers, or in their healing give rise to fibrous 
cicatrices which bind down the epiglottis and lead to such 
stenosis that tracheotomy becomes necessary. Congenital 
syphilis gives rise to similar damage. Neither cougli nor pain 
are commonly present. 

Treatment is the same as that of syphilis in its other 
manifestations, except that potassium iodide should not 



DISEASES OF THE TRACHEA 607 

be given early. Mercury alone suffices to clear up the 
swelling. 

New Growths ol the Larynx. — Innocent tumours of the larynx 
may occur at any age. The commonest type is the papilloma, 
which appears as a warty outgrowth, often multiple, on the cords 
or ventricular bands. Fibromata and mucous cysts are less 
common. The first symptom is alteration of the voice when the 
cords are imphcated. A large tumour will cause dyspnoea by 
obstructing the airway ; the treatment is operative removal. 

Malignant growths occur more fi^quently in men than 
women, usually affcer the age of forty. Persistent hoarseness 
in an elderly patient should suggest the presence of a carcinoma. 
The commonest growth is squamous-celled carcinoma, seen as 
a single warty tumour on one cord, the movement of which 
becomes impaired. Death results from ulceration and haemor- 
rhage, or fi’om septic comphcations such as celluhtis or 
broncho-pneumonia. 

Treatment . — In early cas^ a complete excision of the 
larynx may preserve Ufe for years ; in many cases great relief 
may result from the local appheation of radium. 

DISEASES OF THE TRACHEA 

Both acute and chronic tracheitis as a rule occur in associa- 
tion with similar inflammation of the bronchi. Tracheitis 
may also develop in cases of diphtheria, tjq)hoid, influenza, 
and measles, while a particularly acute form of the disease may 
follow the inhalation of an irritant such as mustard gas. Acute 
tracheitis gives rise to a sensation of soreness behind the 
manubrium and sternum, and to a paroxysmal nois}" raucous 
cough productive of traces of sputum which are not infre- 
quently blood-stained. The clinical course, prognosis, and 
treatment of simple forms of tracheitis are essentially those of 
the corresponding bronchial infection. Tracheitis associated 
with specific fevers may need special appropriate therapy for 
which the sections concerned should be consulted. 

Tuberculous tracheitis is occasionally found in association 
with tuberculous bronchitis, and leads to local ulceration and 
formation of granulation tissue. The trachea may sometimes 
be involved both in congenital and acquired syphihs, the typical 
lesion being a gummatous ulcer which may progress to stricture 
formation. Vigorous antisyphilitic measures are required at 
an early stage though, as in the case of the larynx, iodides should 
be used with caution. Leprosy and scleroma may also cause 
fitricture of the trachea. 



608 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


These granulomatous lesions, rare primary tumours, more 
frequently adjacent neoplasms, such as retrosternal goitre, 
and inhaled foreign bodies, are sometimes productive of 
obstruction of the lumen of the trachea. 

The symptoms and signs depend upon the extent of the 
obstruction and upon the rapidity of its development. Thus a 
foreign body may cause intense distress, cough, increasing 
dyspnoea which is predominantly inspiratory, stridor and cyanosis, 
and may rapidly be fatal. On the other hand, a slowly pro- 
gressive stricture gives rise to cough, slowly increasing dyspnoea, 
and stridor, which is at first only noticeable during sleep. 

The diagnosis is confirmed by bronchoscopy, and this 
procedure is essential for therapy in some instances, for example, 
an impacted foreign body. Treatment is otherwise that of the 
underlying disease, and may be in part surgical. 

DISEASES OF THE BRONCHI 

During expiration the muscle of the bronchi normally 
contracts so that they shorten and become narrower, while 
in inspiration the musculature relaxes permitting elongation 
and widening. With partial bronchial obstruction, therefore, 
inspiration tends to be less impaired than does expiration, and 
there is a tendency for the distal area of lung to become dis- 
tended and ultimately emphysematous. When bronchial 
obstruction is complete the corresponding area of lung collapses 
completely as a result of absorption of air in the alveoli by the 
circulating blood. A further consequence of bronchial obstruc- 
tion is a proportionate failure of excretion of sputum which 
invariably results ultimately in infection of the bronchi, 
bronchioles, and lung of varying severity. The infection 
commonly occurs while obstruction is partial, it always follows 
within a few days of complete obstruction of a bronchus, and 
while it may remain limited to the segment of lung concerned, 
extension of the process is by no means uncommon. 

Bronchial obstruction may be widespread, as in acute and 
chronic bronchitis or asthma, may involve bronchioles or 
terminal tubes, as in bronchiolitis and broncho-pneumonia 
respectively, or may be localised to a site on a main bronchus. 
In the last instance it may be caused by viscid sputum, blood, 
or an inhaled foreign body, by bronchial neoplasms, or by 
pressure from adjacent tumours, including aneurysm and en- 
larged mediastinal lymph glands. Localised stricture of a 
bronchus arising from trauma, kinking, or chronic inflammation 
win have the same consequences. 



iSRONCHITlS 609 

Additional sequelae of bronchial obstruction with its induced 
atelectasis and pulmonary infection are bronchiectasis, bronchio- 
lectasis, various forms of pneumonia, lung abscess, and their 
complications. The symptoms, physical signs, radiological 
appearances, and other features of the disorder are listed under 
the headings of these various conditions with which it is 
associated. 


BRONCHITIS 

Bronchitis is the commonest disease of the respiratory 
tract. It may be defined as an inflammation of the lining 
membrane of the larger and medium -sized bronchi, and may 
be set up by inJialation of irritating vapours, but in the great 
majority of cases it is the result of infection. The air passages 
are provided with an elaborate defence against invasion by 
foreign organisms. Their lining membrane secretes mucus, 
which is in itself bactericidal. This mucus is continually 
moved upwards and ejected by the action of the ciliary 
processes of the bronchial mucous membrane. Removal of 
the secretion, together with . engulfed organisms and other 
particles, is aided by the respiratory movements. Moreover, 
the epithelial lining has a free blood supply so that, at need, 
a plentiful supply of leucocytes will pass from the capillaries 
to the epithelium to aid the latter in its combat with infecting 
bacteria. The inspired air, before reaching the lungs, comes 
in contact with the mucous membrane of the nose and throat, 
and being deflected at the numerous folds and angles in these 
passages, is cleansed of dusty particles which adhere to the 
moist epithelium. The ring of lymphoid tissue in the upper 
end of the pharynx is an important element in the defence 
against infection. The sensitive reflex of the glottis prevents 
the entry of foreign bodies from the pharynx, and the cough 
reflex aids in the removal of material from the larger tubes. 

Bronchitis results either from a failure of the defences of 
the respiratory tract as a result of their being overwhelmed by 
a virulent infection, or by depression of the resisting power as 
a result of exposure to cold, or as a consequence of some defect 
in the anatomical structures. In a few cases infection is carried 
to the bronchi by the blood stream. 

Acute Bronchitis 

Acute bronchitis, or catarrhal inflammation of the larger 
and medium-sized bronchi, is not a serious disease except in 
infancy and old age. 



610 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

JEtiology . — Acute bronchitis often follows from “ catching 
cold.’’ The inflammatory process extends from the nasal 
fossae down the pharynx and trachea to the bronchial mucous 
membrane. It is also a prominent feature in many influenzal 
epidemics, it follows the inhalation of irritant vapours and 
organic dust, and occurs in association with other diseases, 
especially measles, whooping-cough, and the enteric fevers. 

Infecting organisms include pneumococci, streptococci, 
M. caUirrhaliSy and jB. influenzce. 

Morbid Anatomy . — The mucous lining of the bronchi is 
congested, oedematous and sometimes ulcerated, while on its 
surface there is a great excess of mucus mixed with more or 
less pus. Microscopically the goblet cells are seen to be 
distended, while the walls of the tubes are infiltrated with 
leucocytes. 

Symptoms . — At the onset there is a feeling of oppression 
and languor, together often with m5^algia. The temperature 
and respiration rate are only slightly raised. The cough is 
at first difficult and painful, the expectoration scanty and 
viscid. After a day or two the sputum becomes more plentiful 
and purulent and the cough easier, with great relief to the 
patient. As a rule the symptoms subside after a week, and 
recovery is more or less complete at the end of a fortnight. 
In the case of infants and of feeble elderly subjects there is a 
danger of the smaller tubes becoming blocked with secretion 
and of broncho-pneumonia resulting. 

Physical and Radiological Signs . — The tongue is usually 
coated, and the voice husky. As regards the chest, signs are 
often surprisingly slight. In most cases a few high- and low- 
pitched rhonchi are heard accompanying inspiration, scattered 
over both lungs, and moist rales may be detected chiefly in 
the lower lobes. Radiologically active vascular congestion 
may be apparent. 

Diagnosis . — There is little difficulty in diagnosing acute 
bronchitis. It may, however, be only a feature heralding the 
onset of some more serious disease such as typhoid, measles, 
or whooping-cough. 

TreatmerU . — ^The patient should stay in bed and keep 
warm. Chemotherapy, especially in feeble patients, may be 
employed. A steam-kettle relieves the sensation of rawness 
in the chest as also do inhalations from \ dr. ol. pinae sibericse 
in 1 pint of nearly boiling water. Dover’s powder or syrup of 
codeine should be given at night, and during the first few 
days a mixture containing 3 to 6 gr. of potassium iodide or 
12 minims of vinum antimoniale may be used to loosen the 



ACUTE BRONCHITIS 


611 


expectoration. An alkaline expectorant should be given as 
soon as the cough is productive. 

In children, relief is obtained by rubbing the chest with a 
stimulating liniment such as camphor. If there is much 
secretion, and expectoration does not keep pace with it, vomit- 
ing should be induced by administration of a tablespoonful 
of tincture of ipecacuanha. 

Bronchiolitis. — Bronchiolitis or capillary bronchitis is an 
acute inflammatory process involving the smallest air tubes. 
It is a dangerous complication of acute bronchitis, not un- 
common in young children ; it is relatively rare in adults, but 
was the cause of death in many of the cases of influenza in the 
pandemic of 1918. 

Symptoms , — As a rule the symptoms of inflammation of the 
larger tubes are present for several days before the bronchioles 
become affected. When the smallest tubes become involved 
they are quickly obstructed by secretion and swelling of the 
walls, and a profound change comes over the clinical picture. 
Dyspnoea and tachycardia become marked. The face takes 
on a pecuUar lilac-tinted lividity ; the patient becomes ex- 
hausted, and mental disturbance is shown by delirium or 
coma. 

Physical and Radiological Signs . — On examination of the 
chest the intercostal spaces are seen to fall in during inspiration. 
Areas of impaired resonance may indicate collapse of portions 
of the limgs. Rales are to be heard over the lungs, while 
widespread acute emphysema greatly reduces breath soimds. 
X-ray appearances are very variable, in a mild case only a few 
fine scattered opacities of lobular collapse will be seen, but 
in more serious examples of the disease the appearances more 
nearly resemble those of broncho-pneumonia, with midtiple 
patchy ill-defined shadows particularly involving the bases. 
In addition, the increase in chest size and translucency charac- 
teristic of emphysema will be found. 

Prognosis . — In acute cases the outlook is extremely grave, 
but recovery is not uncommon in those of a less fulminating 
type. An occasional sequel is the development of a permanent 
dilatation or bronchiolectasis. 

Treatment . — An abundant supply of fresh air is essential. 
The patient should be nursed as far as possible outdoors. 
Oxygen should be administered continuously by means of a 
tent, mask, or nasal catheters. Venesection may be beneficial ; 
hypodermic injections of atropine are given at regular intervals 
in order to diminish the quantity of secretion and so relieve 
the obstruction in the bronchioles. Sulphonamides have yet 



612 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

to be proved to be of value. Therapy is otherwise that of 
bronchitis. 


Chbonio Bbonohitis 

JEtiology . — Chronic bronchitis is a common afiSiction in 
those over forty, and it is occasionally encountered in the 
young. It occurs most frequently in cold damp climates 
among those who live in towns ; at first they are affected only 
in the cold season, but as time goes on the condition lasts 
longer and longer into the summer until ultimately it continues 
aU the year round. It may follow several attacks of acute 
bronchitis, and may be consequent on some structural 
defect of the lungs, such as emphysema, which diminishes their 
mobility, in turn producing stagnation of the bronchial secretion 
and infection of the bronchi themselves. 

Other conditions which favour the development of chronic 
bronchitis are spinal curvature, fibrosis following unresolved 
pneumonia, empyema, and asthma. In the absence of any of 
the above, search should be made for some focus of infection 
from which organisms may be entering the respiratory passages. 
Such foci may be present in oral sepsis, disease in the nasal 
fossae or accessory sinuses. 

Morbid Anatomy . — ^The lungs are emphysematous, the 
mucous lining of tlm bronchi may be thick and granular, but 
in some cases it is atrophied. Bronchiectasis may coexist. 

SympUms. — A. major complaint is of shortness of breath 
on exertion. This is due partly to the associated emphysema 
and partly to the presence of excessive secretion in the tubes. 
This secretion beeches churned into a foam by the air passing 
through the bronchi, and interferes with the entry of the 
inspired air into the air sacs. The capacity for work and exer- 
cise is greatly diminished by the restricted intake of oxygen, as 
well as by the absorption of toxins from the infected secretions. 
The cough is apt to be most troublesome during the night, dis- 
turbing sleep. The lack of sleep together with dyspnoea and 
toxaemia sometimes lead to emaciation. The sputum consists 
chiefiy of translucent gelatinous muons, which in town dwellers 
is stippled with black carbon particles. During exacerbations 
of the disease, admixture of pus renders the sputum yellow or 
green, and streaks of blood may appear as a result of oozing 
firom the congested or ulcerated mucosa. 

Asthma fesquently oomplioates the disease. Occasionally 
in oases of long standing the presence of extensive emphysema 
leads to a consecutive rise of the pulmonary artmial pressure, 



CHRONIC BRONCHITIS 613 

and eventually to hypertrophy of the right ventricle. In such 
oases terminal congestive heart failure is sometimes seen. 

Physical and Radiological Signs . — ^The signs are usually 
trivial in proportion to the symptoms. Emphysema is recog- 
nised by the changes described elsewhere {vide p. 620). The 
bronchitis reveals itself by rhonchi and moist rSIes heard chiefly 
over the lower lobes ; it may be necessary to make the patient 
cough and take deep breaths before these are elicited. Associ- 
ated bronchial spasm gives rise to widespread musical rhonchi 
and prolonged expiration. In advanced stages of the condition, 
cyanosis is evident, especially at the ears and finger-tips, and the 
latter become clubbed. The radiological appearances are those 
of emphysema, together sometimes with vascular engorgement. 

Treatment . — Sepsis in the mouth and nasopharynx must 
be dealt with. In many cases mobility of the chest wall arid 
removal of bronchial secretion can be aided by breathing 
exercises. Expectoration should also be promoted by the 
occasional use of the following mixture, which should be taken 
with an equal quantity of hot water : sod. chlor. gr. iii, sod. 
bicarb, gr. v, spt. chlorof. II^v, aq. ad ^i. The infection may 
be ameliorated by inhalations ; a convenient method is to 
employ a Burney Yeo inhaler. The patient should take 
regularly during the winter months an alkaline expectorant con- 
taining potassium iodide : ammon. carb. gr. iii, sod. bicarb, gr. x, 
pot iod. gr. V, syrup, aurant. 388, aq. ad Jss. Codeine may be 
given freely in doses of ^ to 1 gr. by mouth to reduce the cough 
at night. Cod-liver oil is useful in improving the general health. 

By these means the inflanunatory process may be reduced to 
a minimum, and when this has been accomplished a course of 
injections of a vaccine prepared from the organisms in the 
patient’s sputum may be of some assistance. These patients, 
in general, are far healthier in a warm equable climate, and 
should if possible avoid the English winter. 

Foetid Bronchitis. — Casee previously described under this 
heading are now believed to have been examples of 
bronchiectasis or of chronic lung abscess. 

Plastic Bronchitis. — ^This is an uncommon affection character- 
ised by the formation of oasts in the bronchial tree. The 
patient is troubled by an irritating cough which increases in 
severity for several days. At last, in a paroxysm of coughing, 
a white inuoo-purulent lump is expectorated, and this on being 
unroUed in water is found to contain the hollow oast of a 
bronchus with dichotomous branching. The oast consists of 
^uoin ; after it has been expectorated the symptoms cease, 
but often recur at intervals of months or 3 rears. 



614 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


The condition is seldom serious, and no treatment is known 
to be ouratiye. The cause is unknown, but similar mucinous 
casts are sometimes expectorated after paracentesis for pleural 
effusion, or in association with pneumonia, pulmonary tuber- 
culosis, or mucous colitis. 


BRONCHIECTASIS 

The setiology of bronchiectasis is uncertain. Dilatation of 
the bronchi may occur in the main tranks, in smaUer branches, 
and even the bronchioles may be involved. In extent it may 
be widespread throughout the limgs, or limited to a few tubw 
in one lobe. Most commonly the lower lobes are involved. 
Dilatation of the larger trunks tends to be cylindrical or fusi- 
form, while smaller bronchi and bronchioles which have little 
muscle and no cartilage in their walls dilate to form saccules. 

Complete bronchial obstruction gives rise to atelectasis 
of the lung, which in turn causes a considerable fall in the intra- 
pleural pressure, since the volume of the contents of a semi-rigid 
structure has been diminished. The decrease in volume is 
partly made good by movement inwards of the thoracic 
parieties, by ^placement of the mediastinmn toward the 
atelectatic lung, by compensatory emphysenia of the residual 
lung and by Natation of the bronchi within the atelectatic 
area. Clinically, furthermore, the association of bronchiectasis 
with antecedent pulmonary inflammation, such as the 
pneumonias, particularly broncho-pneumonia, lung abscess, and 
tuberculosis, is well recognised. Since, if bronchial obstruction 
persists, pyogenic infection within the atelectatic sector quickly 
follows, inflammatory damage to the stretched bronchial wall 
may occur, and may result in permanent dilatation even if the 
obstruction proves to be temporary and the lung re-expands. 

Basal bronchiectasis occurs more commonly in the left 
than in the right lung. This is probably due to the anatomical 
relations of the left main bronchus, which render it more 
susceptible to occlusion by compression when, for example, 
tuberculous mediastinal lymphadenitis develops. 

EinaUy, congenital cystic disease of the bronchi, which is 
probably less rare than has hitherto been believed, has many 
characteristics (vide p. 616) so similar to those of acquired 
bronchiectasis as to suggest that a developmental abnormdity 
may play a part in the »tiok^ of the latter. 

Morbid Anatomy . — ^When the affected lung is incised and 
the cut surface inqieoted, the dilated tubes axe seen with 



BRONCHIECTASIS 615 

their congested muoosa projecting. Microscopical examination 
of the bronchiectatic cavities shows their epithelium to be 
degenerate and devoid of ciliary processes and in some cases 
to be replaced by granulations and fibrous tissue. In the Mea 
affected the lung may be atelectatic, and often evidence of 
chronic pneumonia is shown together with a more or less 
extensive fibrosis. Emphysema in the peripheral and 
uninvolved areas of limg is always present. 

Symptoms . — ^It is probable that many patients in whom 
bronchial dilatation is present continue without symptoms for 
long periods of time. Not infi'equently the main symptom 
is recurrent, often severe, haemoptysis. Sooner or ^ter, 
infection within the dilated tubra dominates the clinical 
picture, and then periodic attacks of violent cough productive 
of large quantities of purulent sputum result. The most severe 
paroxysm as a rule occurs with change in posture, for example, 
when the patient awakes in the morning, and such an attack 
often culminates in vomiting. Periods of freedom fix»m symp- 
toms may occur, for example, in warm weather, though these 
tend to decrease. Intercurrent infection, or an exacerbation 
of the existing infection, may easily at any time give rise to 
bronchitis, pneumonia, pleurisy, or empyema. With time the 
sputum becomes fcetid and the breath most offensive. In 
such cases a chronic septic pneumonia may lead to cachexia. 
In unilateral bronchiectasis the patient lies on the affected 
side, for his sleep will not be disturbed by cough as long as the 
secretions remain in the dilated and insensitive tubes. He may 
live many years. Death may result from toxtemia, broncho- 
pneumonia, cerebral abscess, or amyloid disease. 

Physical and Badiohgical Signs . — ^If the disease is minor 
in degree and remote fit>m the surface, there may be no abnormal 
signs, and diagnosis must be based on the symptoms. Where 
there are saccular dilations near the chest wall, clear signs of 
cavitation with numerous rhonchi and coarse rides may be 
obtamed. Associated atelectasis and fibrosis result in 
mediastinal displacement towards the affected side, impaired 
movement and percussion note, and & diminished air entry, 
which may be bronchial in type. The fingers and toes may be 
clubbed, and the nails curved and thick. Sometimes there is 
hypertrophy of the phalanges, wrists, and ankles — “ hyper- 
trophic pulmonary osteo-arthropathy.” 

Badiologically lobar or lobular atelectasis may be shown, 
and not infrequently the oui^e of the hollow* dilated bronchi 
may be seen. On other occasions patchy consolidation may be 
the only demonstrable abnormality, while often bronchiectasis 



616 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

is not revealed by X-ray examination unless the bronchi are 
outlined by radio-opaque iodised oil. The technique of bronchog- 
raphy can only be learnt by practical experience, and therefore 
no attempt is made to describe the various methods adopted. 
As a preliminary, however, it is essential to exclude cocaine 
and iodine sensitivity, and it should be remembered before 
attempting the proc^ure that a considerable proportion of 
the opaque oil may be retained indefinitely in the lung and thus 
detract from the value of subsequent X-ray examination. 
Bronchography is most useful if at one time the entire 
bronchial tree of one lung only is delineated ; for in this way 
both lateral and postero-anterior films will be of value in 
localising the disease. 

Treatment . — ^Early efficient treatment of such disorders as 
massive collapse and broncho-pneumonia will reduce the 
incidence of bronchiectasis. In early cases residence in a warm 
dry climate, the avoidance as far as possible of intercurrent 
infections, therapy for coexistent disease such as nasal polypi 
or sinusitis, and the practice of breathing exercises are important. 
Once sepsis has become established, medical therapy can only 
be palliative, and is designed to keep the cavities as clean as 
possible. The secretions must be emptied out several times a 
day by postural drainage, the patient with basal disease lying 
on an inclined plane head downwards and coughing. Con- 
tinuous postural drainage is greatly facilitated by the use of 
the Nelson tilting bed. Antiseptic inhalations are beneficial, 
creosote or turpentine being used on a Burney Yeo inhaler. 
If the severity of the symptoms justifies radical treatment, the 
method of choice is excision of the affected lobe or lobes. This 
must only be imdertaken after complete bronchography has 
demonstrated that the diseased bronchi are entirely or ailmost 
entirely restricted to the area to be removed at lobectomy or 
pneumonectomy. This form of therapy should rarely be 
attempted in patients over the age of forty-five, or in those 
in whom cardio-vascular or other disease coexists. 


CONGENITAL CYSTIC DISEASE OF THE 
BRONCHI 

In the last decade an increased interest in the problem 
and the widespread use of radiology in the investigation of 
diseases of the chest have made it seem likely that cystic 
disease of the bronchi of congenital origin exists. Cystio 
dilatation of bronchi, howerer, can undoubtedly be acquired. 




Pi. \XK 23 

l^r<mcho;;ratn of tlu* rijzht liiii^jc showing hasiil broii- 
<)^.^^^. { Kroiii film l>\ l>r T. M. Mills.) 



Pl-ATK 24 

Hroiic’hial c'a.rc*inonia (rig^ht lateral view). The miciclle 
lc>l>e iH eolla}>»edancl lipiodol ahowa obatniotioii, marked 
by an arrow. (Krom film f>y I>r T. H. Hills,) 



Plate ' 2 '> 

Congenital cystic disease of the bronchi. 


\To fact page 617 . 




CONGENITAL CYSTIC DISEASE OF THE BRONCHI 617 

Isolated cases in which the disorder has occurred in the foetus 
are on record, and it is thought that arrest or abnormal 
development of the lung buds at an early stage may account 
for their formation. Pathological investigation has shown that 
the epithelial lining of these cysts tends to be imiform and 
constant in type, and furthermore that the supporting tissues, 
e.g., cartilage, muscle, vessels, and glands, are most erratically 
distributed in the cyst wall. In these respects the histology 
of the disease differs from that of bronchiectasis or lung 
abscess. 

In the existing state of our knowledge it is convenient 
to adopt a clinical classification of this disorder such as the 
following : — 

1. Cysts not communicating with bronchi. 

2. C^ts communicating with bronchi. 

(а) Simple unilocular cysts. 

(б) Multiple cysts (soap-bubble and berry types). 

Congenital bronchial cysts which do not communicate with 
the bronchial tree are very rare, they contain fluid, and as far 
as is known produce no 83 Tnptom 8 . In one case seen by the 
writer about sixteen such cysts, varying in size from a pea to 
a golf ball were disclosed following the routine radiological 
examination of a patient aged forty. He had had no serious 
pulmonary disease and remained well during a five-year period 
of observation in which the radiological appearances persisted 
unchanged. Occasionally such a cyst may rupture into a 
bronchus, thereby discharging its contents, and subsequently 
behave as those of the second category. 

Cysts communicating with bronchi contain air, and are 
characterised radiologicf^y by very clearly defined thin limit- 
ing walls. As a rule they give rise to few distinctive signs or 
symptoms unless and until secondary infection supervenes. 
Occasionally, however, particularly in infants and children, 
increasing inflation of a solitary cyst by check-valve action 
of the communicating bronchus may occur and lead to gross 
increase in size of the cyst and all the consequences of a tension 
pneumothorax. Radiologioally such cases may usually be 
differentiated from the latter by the absence of the collapsed 
lung at the hilum, and the presence of traces of pulmonary 
tissue at the periphery of the hemithorax. Fu^ermore, 
cysts communicating with bronchi aue particularly liable to 
give rise to haemoptysis, and when this happens the un- 
expeotorated blood wi thin the cyst sometimes dots. Under 
such oircumstamoes a characteristic radiological picture is 



618 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

given ; for, with retraction of the clot from the cyst wall, 
the appearance of a stone loose within its setting is £^own. 

We do not know what is the proportion of cases of cystic 
disease of the lungs which remain uninfected throughout life, 
and since it is the advent of infection within the cyst or cysts 
which as a rule brings these cases to om notice, it is not 
improbable that at present we overestimate tiie probability 
of infection. In our own experience three cases, ea<^ over the 
age of fifty, have been encountered by chance in which there 
were and had been no symptoms associated with the disorder. 
On the other hand, septic infection when it does occur is 
commonly severe and often fatal. Attacks of bronchitis 
frequently accompanied by bronchial spasm may precede a 
fulminating septic pneumonia by months or even years. 
Laige infected single cysts have ^e signs of and behave as 
woidd a lung abscess, while multiple cysts quickly give rise 
to the clinici^ syndrome of advanced bronchiectasis. When 
infection is sufficiently prolonged it is not unusual for acquired 
atelectasis and bronchiectasis to complicate the disorder. In 
such oases the clinical diagnosis of congenital cystic disease 
cannot be made with certainty. 

In uninfected cases difficulty in diagnosis from localised 
pneumothorax and emphysematous buUn may be encountered. 
The history of the case, the age of the patient and the site, 
appearance and shape of the l^on will be of assistance ; 
certainty of diagnosis, however, may only be obtained by 
histological examination after lobectomy. 

Infected cysts have to be distinguished from empyema 
(including interlobar empyema), lung abscess, and saccular 
brondiiectasis. The failure to reiqx>nd to adequate drainage 
will suggest a cyst rather than an empyema, while a lung 
abscess often shows clinical and radiolc^cal evidence of sur- 
rounding pneumonitis. As has been said it may not be possible 
to distinguish saccular bronchiectasis from 03r8tic disease. 
The distinction, however, is of academic interest rather than 
of therapeutic importance. 

Radical treatment of symptomless congenital (^sts of the 
lung is rarely justified. Close observation and prophylactio 
measures designed to prevent respiratory infections are, how- 
ever, necessary. The exceptions to tl^ will as a r^ be 
found among children in whom the chance of infection is 
relatively great, and whose resistance to the haeards of opera- 
tion is oonsidmble. Thmupy in those oases with ledons 
productive of symptoms shotdd, where possible, consist of 
radical removal by lobectomy or pneunMmectomy, and 



619 


DISEASES OP THE LUNGS 

adequate bronchography must precede the operation ; for 
the diseaee is conunonly bilateral or complicate by acquired 
bronchiectasis in the remaining pulmonary tissue. In 
acutely infected single oysba prelimioaiy drainage may be 
of value. 

In those cases in which suppuration has occurred and in 
which for any reason operative removal of the diseased area 
cannot be undertaken, postural drainage, expectorants, and 
creosote may alleviate symptoms. 


DISEASES OF THE LUNGS 
EfFBOTS of DiSTUBBANOE of the ClBOUIiATIO»r 

Congestion. — ^Active congestion accompanies all inflamma- 
tory diseases of the lungs, and is seen most strikingly in the 
first stage of lobar pneumonia. 

Passive congestion occurs when, following a rise in pressure 
within the pnlmonaiy veins, there results a slowing of the 
circulation through the lungs. Such congestion may happen 
rapidly in the left ventricular failure associated with coronary 
thrombosis, while it is a chronic process in cases of mitral 
stenosis. It is, moreover, one of the earliest indications of heart 
failure, whatever the type of heart disease. The more dependent 
portions of the lungs, usually the bases, are the first and the 
most affected. Pxilmonary oedema may develop. 

Symptoms referable to the condition are dyspnoea, including 
cardiac aisthma, cough, and expectoration. The first of these 
is, at any rate in part, due to the diminished elasticity of the 
lungs caused by the increase in pressure in the pulmonary 
circulation. Hsemoptysis, usually minor m degree, often 
occurs. The physical signs, apart firom those of the underlying 
cardiac abnormality, include a diminished chest expansion 
and air entry, together with an impaired percussion note and 
r&les at the bases. 

The post-mortem appearances in chronic venous congestion 
are described on page 568. 

(Edema d the Lungi. — (Edema of the lungs may result from 
infection, from thie inhalation of irritant gases, but is commonly 
secondary to disease of the heart, aorta, or kidneys ; occasion- 
ally it (fevelops after aspiration of a pleural effuiaion. The 
symptoms may come on suddenly ; the patient is seized with 
extreme dyspnoea and pain in the chest, and expectorates 
large quantities of serous or blood-stained ^th. He may lose 
consciousness and die, or the symptoms may subside aftw an 



620 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

hour or two and recovery take place ; some patients have 
survived repeated attacks. Treatment is essentially that of 
left ventricular failure, and the most effective measures consist 
of rest, venesection, and the injection of ^ gr. of morphia and 
gr. of atropine, followed by efficient oxygen administration. 
Embolism and Infarction. — Vide p. 596. 


EMPHYSEMA 

In this condition the air sacs are dilated and their walls 
atrophied, while fiequently the rupture of the walls of many 
alveoli results in the formation of bulhe. A number of varieties 
of the condition occur, the chief forms being known respectively 
as hypertrophic, atrophic, compensatory, acute vesicular, and 
acute interstitial. 

Hypertrophic Emphysema. — Etiology . — ^This is uncertain. 
Hypertrophic emphysema occurs frequently in some fiunilies, 
and may be associate with an inherent weakness of the elastic 
tissues of the lungs. Freund, on the other hand, has suggested 
that premature ossification of the costal cartilages, with 
immobility of the thoracic wall, is the primary change. The 
frequent occurrence of emphysema in association with bronchitis 
and asthma, however, would make it seem probable that long- 
continued expiratory obstruction is the important causal foctof . 
Localised emphysema occurs when a bronchus is partiaUy 
obstructed by, for example, a growth or foreign body. 

Morbid Anodomy . — ^The thorax is enlarged, chiefly in its 
anteroposterior diameter, and the intercostal spaces are wide. 
On opening the chest, the lungs fail to collapse ; they are 
voluminous and hide the pericardium firom view ; they are pale 
in colour, and projecting bulhe may be seen, especially near the 
apices and anterior margins. Microscopic examination shows 
large, thin-walled sdveoli, which in many places form extensive 
irreg^r chambers owing to disappearance of the inter-alveolar 
septa. These septa support the capillaries concerned in the 
gaseous exchanges of the blood, so that their disappearance 
causes a great dhninution in the capillary bed of the pt^onary 
circulation. Ruely the right ventricle may show varying 
grades of hypertrophy and dilatation. 

Symptoms . — Hie charaoteristio symptom of emphysema is 
dyspnoea. In the earlier stages this is only noticed on exertion, 
but as the condition devdops the shortness of breath occurs 
with less provocation, until finally it is continuous even at rest, 
and is acoompanied by cyanosis and drculatory ^nre. Tlu» 



621 


EMPHYSEMA 

dyspnoea partly results from the mechanical disadvantage of 
the increased residual air characteristic of the condition, and 
partly from the decreased elasticity of the lungs. The symptoms 
are aggravated by the accompanying bronchitis, to which all 
emphysematous patients are susceptible. 

Phyaicai and Badiological Signs . — ^The condition is revealed 
by inspection of the thorax, which in characteristic cases is 
barrel-shaped. It is deep fixim back to front, the ribs are hori- 
zontal and kept in the position of inspiration, the subcostal 
angle is widened, and the normal 3 to 4 in. expansion is 
diminished to in. or less. The shoulders are raised, the spine 
is kyphotic, and there is no visible impulse in the precordium. 
The percussion note is hyper-resonant and dullness over the 
heart and liver is obliterated. The breath sounds are feeble 
and the expiratory murmur is prolonged. X-ray shows an 
enlarged thorax, horizontal widely spaced ribs, a low poorly 
moving diaphragm, and relatively more translucent limg 
fields. The heart is sometimes elongated and thin. In advanced 
cases pulmonary vascular engorgement with or without right 
ventricular hypertrophy may be seen. Large bullae, crossed by 
fine strands of pulmonary tissue, are sometimes present. 

Treatment . — ^The ohangee m the lungs are degenerative 
and irremediable. The chest wall may be rendered more 
mobile by suitable exercises but the most profitable methods of 
treatment aure those designed to cure or prevent bronchitis. 
Equable dimatio conditions aure of the greatest importauioe, and 
if possible the patient should not winter in a smoky city, or 
in a looadity where sudden ohamges of temx>erature or cold 
winds are prevalent. 

Atrophic Emphysema. — ^This is a senile chatnge and accom- 
panies other stigmata of degeneration. The alveolar waUs 
become atrophic and the septa give way, but the lungs aure 
small and retracted and the ribs oblique. 

Compensatory Emphysema. — ^This is a local distension of 
the alveoli, and is the result of shrinkage of other regions of the 
lungs from collapse or fibrosis. The intra-thorMio pressure 
being negative, when the contents of, the chest become 
diminished by disease, the nearest healthy and elastic portions 
of the lungs become dilated to occupy the vacant space. At 
first the alveolar walls are simply stretched, but in course of 
time they become atrophied and true emphysema develops. 

Aonte Vesioular Emphysema. — ^This condition occurs as a 
result of sudden rupture of alveoli, such as may be associated 
with excessive cough and muscular strain. It is uncommon, 
but is found, for example, in cases of asphyxia, poisoning by 



622 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

imtant gases, whooping-cough, and acute laryngitis. Symptoms 
and signs are usually mask^ by those of the causal condition, 
but are essentially Ihose given under hypertrophic emphysema. 

Aonte Zntentltial Emphysema. — ^This is a variety of 
“surgical emphysema,” in which air is driven throt^ a 
rupture in the alveolar wall into the pulmonary interstituJ 
tissues. It may occur in whooping-cough, as a residt of tramna, 
blast injury, or muscular strain. If sufficiently extensive, 
it win involve the mediastinum and even spread to the neck 
and face. As a rule the air is absorbed spontaneously in a few 
days, though death may occur quickly, diniot^y the patient 
is dyspnoeio and may be cyanosed, and often complains of 
tightness and pain in the chest. Surgical emphysema may be 
palpable in the neck, crackhng noises may be heard widely 
over the chest, and X-ray may show the presence of air in the 
soft tissues. Treatment consists of absolute rest, abolition of 
the cough reflex with morphia, and the administration of 
oxygen. 


PULMONARY COLLAPSE 

Collapse of the lung may be partial or complete. The 
former occurs when the diaphragm is elevated for any cause, 
or when, for example, air, or fluid of any kind «ccumulates in 
the pleural cavity. Both the air entry and the blood and lymph 
flow in the involved hing are diminished in proportion to the 
extwt of the collapse, while a compensatory increase in ventila- 
tion and circulation takes place in the other lung. The 
diminution in air entry is reflected in the physical signs which 
are otherwise those of the causal condition. Rf^ological 
examination reveals the cause and indicates the extent of the 
collapse. As a rule re-expansion of the lung from partial collapse 
immediately or rapidly follows the removal of the productive 
lesion, and there are then no pulmonary sequeln. Complete 
collapse of lung, often called pulmonary atelectasis, may persist 
because the lung does not expand at birth, or may develop 
following absorption of air by the drculating blood if a bronchus 
or bronchiole is completely obstructed. The causes of such an 
obstruction have been discussed (vide p. 608). 

Acquired pulmonary ateleota^ is a conunon condition. It 
plays a fundamental part in the pathology of numy pulmonary 
inflammations and injuries, is ^qrientiy assodated with any 
kind of intrathoracio tumour, and may supervene upon pardal 
pulmonary collapse from kinking or defective drainage of a 
bronchus. The extent of the leskm is determined by the dae 



PULMONARY COLLAPSE 623 

and xrambw of bronohi or bronduoles obslaracted; thus, a 
lobe or the whole lung becomes atelectatic respectiyely if the 
lobar or main bronchus is occluded (the so-called massive 
collapse), while scattered lobular atelectasis follows multiple 
bronchiolar obstruction. The lower lobes are most commoidy 
affected, and the left lower lobe more commonly than the 
right. 

Complete collapse of an area of lung diminishes the volume 
of the thoracic contents. Partial compensation occurs by 
displacement of the thoracic parities and mediastinum toward 
the collapsed area, by emphysema of the remaining and par- 
ticularly the adjacmit pulmonary tissue, and by dilatation of 
bronchi and blood-vessels within the atelectatic lung. Since 
of these structures some are semi-rigid, some relatively elastic, 
the change occurs at the expense of the development of an 
increase of tension locally — a measure of which may be obtained 
if the intrapleural pressure is recorded, when it will be found 
that this pressure is more removed from atmospheric (more 
negative) than is the case over normal lung. Important changes 
foUow. Vascular dilatation within the completely collapi^ 
Itmg has as a result the return of venous blood to the left side 
of the heart, and, therefore, a fall in the oxygen saturation of 
the arterial blood. Further impairment of circulatory function 
is due to the distortion of the great veins arising from 
mediastirud displacement, and this effect is enhanced as may 
be shown at ra^oscopy with each inspiration. 

Emphysema of adjacent lung may become permanent, 
and similarly, the stretched bronchi may lose their elasticity 
beyond recovery particularly if infection of their muscle 
coats supervenes. Since with bronchial obstruction the 
drainage of the sputum ceases, infection in these bronchi 
and in the collapa^ lung as a rule quickly follows. Bron- 
chiectasis, and pulmonary suppuration with lung abscess 
formation may therefore develop. Pulmonary atelectasis 
may persist even if the cause is removed. 

Synmtoms. — Congenital pulmonary atelectasis causes pallid 
asphyxia. The acqtdred form, if extensive, gives rise to cough, 
dyspnoea, cyanosis, and pleuritic pain frx>m the onset of collapse, 
while to these are add^ the consequences of infection if and 
when that occurs. 

Phj^cal and Radiological Signs. — ^Diminution in size and 
limitation of the movement of the chest wall on the affected 
side may be seoa and Mt, as may displacement of the heart 
and trachea. Over tixe atelectatic lung the percussion note is 
impaired, while adjacent areas wOl be hyper-resonant. 



624 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

Atelectatic lung conducts sound at least as well as does con- 
solidated lung ; when, therefore, it is adjacent to a bronchus 
through which air is passing, auscultation will reveal bronchial 
breathing, bronchophony, and whispering pectoriloquy, though 
wlien the atelectatic area (e.gr., a lower lobe) is distant from such 
a bronchus breath sounds and vocal resonance may be 
diminished or absent. 

Radiologically atelectatic lung is homogeneously opaque. 
The site and size of the opacity will depend upon the area of 
lung involved, and there will in addition be associated emphy- 
sema of adjacent lung, and mediastinal displacement toward the 
affected area. Multilobular atelectasis can only be differentiated 
radiologically from broncho -pneumonia b}" this displacement. 

Treatment . — The treatment of partial pulmonary collapse 
is that of the cause. Pulmonary atelectasis arising as a result 
of the inhalation of foreign bodies, or by viscid sputum, or 
blood clot obstructing a major bronchus is a medical emergency 
demanding bronchoscopy at which the obstruction can fre- 
quently be removed. This procedure may also permit accurate 
diagnosis in those cases in w’hich the cause is not obvious by 
routine investigation. In multilobular atelectasis and in cases 
where bronchoscopy fails to relievo the atelectasis, and where 
no gross cause su(;h as neoplastic disease is present, postural 
drainage, an expectorant containing jx)ta8sium iodide, inhala- 
tions of 5 per cent. CO 2 in oxygen, and breathing exercises may 
be advisable. Some of the serious consequences of extensive 
temporary atelectasis may be prevented by the induction and 
maintenance of a small pneumothorax mitil bronchial 
obstruction is relieved. The treatment of intrathoracic tumours, 
and of the bronchiectasis and other consequences arising from 
pulmonary atelectasis is set forth elsewhere. 


THE PNEUMONIAS 

Pneumonia is essentially an inflammation of the substance 
of the lung, with the production of exudate in the alveoli. 
Classically two main types are recxjgnised : lobar or croupous 
pneumonia and lobular or broncho-pneumonia. Lobar pneu- 
monia is a specific infective disease with a characteristic clinical 
course, due to a particular organism. 

Broncho-pneumonia is in most instances a secondary 
condition ; its course is indefinite and bacteriology variable, 
and it is possible to distinguish several varieties which have 
fairly well-defined clini(^al and pathological characteristics. 



LOBAR PNEUMONIA 6^6 

In addition there exists an iU-defined group of non-specific 
pulmonary inflammations, some relatively benign and of short 
duration, others much more chronic, which are at present 
best classified among the pneumonias. 


LOBAR PNEUMONIA 

Bacteriology. — The causative organism is the Streptococcus 
pneumonicB or Pneumococcus. This is a capsulated lanceolate 
gram-positive coccus growing in pairs or short chains. Sero- 
logical tests show that the pneumococci may be divided into 
various types. Three of these types occur with considerable 
frequency in adult pneumonia and are sometimes termed the 
“ fixed ” types. They are designated by the Roman numerals 
I., II., and 111. 

In addition to these ty})es there occur nearly thirty other 
strains which, while capable of stimulating the formation of 
specific antibodies, do not occur individually sufficiently 
frequently to justify their separation as distinct “ types.” 
These are classed together as “ Group IV.” and are frequently 
present in the normal throat. 

This classification has considerable practical importance in 
regard to the prognosis of pneumococcal infections as a whole, 
and particularly in regard to lobar pneumonia. The following 
table shows (1) the relative frequency of the various types 
of pneumococci in lobar pneumonia in a series of cases in- 
vestigated by Ghmn, Digby, and Jones in England, and (2) the 
case fatality ])er cent, as recorded by Ocil. 


j 

1 

1 

Typo I. 

Type II. 

Type III. 

Group IV. 

Relative frequency 

Per Cent. 
45-8 

Per Cent. 
24 0 

Per Cent. 
21 

Per Cent. 
281 

Case mortality 

22 0 

40-3 

40 0 

24*0 


The relative frequency and the case fatality of the individual 
types varies considerably from year to year, and in different 
localities, but generally speaking Type HI. appears to be the 
least common and most fatal infection, while Type I, is the 
most frequent and has the lowest mortality. 

It must be pointed out, however, that the pneumonic 
infections of very young children are very seldom caused by 
“ fixed ” types, and that Group IV. infections are in such 

40 



626 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

patients as commonly fatal as Types I., II., and III. At times 
lobar pneumonia has been known to occur in almost epidemic 
form and it may be found that the majority of cases in such 
an epidemic belong to a homogeneous t}^ which does not 
belong to Types I., II., or III. 

Highly concentrated sera are available containing Types I. 
and II., antibodies which are of limited use in the treatment of 
lobar pneumonia due to these organisms. 

iEtiology. — Lobar pneumonia occurs most commonly in 
temperate chmates, and it accounts for a greater number of 
deaths than any other acute disease in the United Kingdom. 
Although most cases are sporadic, widespread epidemics occur 
from time to time. It is common at the two extremes of life, 
and relatively rare between the ages of six and fifteen years. 
In children complications such as emp3oraa are frequent, but 
the mortahty is low ; after the thirtieth joar mortality rises 
with each decade. Above the age of sixty there are relatively 
few recoveries, and indeed it kills so quickly and mercifully 
that it has been called ‘‘ the old man's friend.” In children 
the sexes are attacked equally, but in adults 70 j>er cent, of 
cases occur in males. One attack does not confer immunity, 
on the contrary", one or more recurrences often follow, and 
Piush has recorded a case in which one individual had pneumonia 
twenty-eight times. Successive attacks are usually mild. 
The negro races are specially susceptible. 

Pneumonia sometimes follows chest injuries and the in- 
halation of irritant gases, but the commonest setiological 
factors are those which impair the defensive mechanism 
against infections, such as old age and chronic debilitating 
diseases. Instances of the latter are diabetes, nephritis, portal 
cirrhosis, and chronic alcoholism ; moreover it is said that 
one-sixth of all insane persons die of pneumonia (G. W. Norris). 
Of acute illnesses influenza is the one most often complicated 
by pneumococcal pneumonia, though it usually takes the lobular 
form. When healthy young adults are attacked it may be a 
result of exposure to cold, or exhaustion following violent 
physical exertion. Lobar pneumonia occasionally follows 
op)erations, though post-ojjerative complications such as 
broncho-pneumonia, massive collapse, or infarction are more 
common. 

Pathology and Morbid Anatomy. — The disease commences 
as a septicfemia, which may continue for several days before 
any local involvement of the lung becomes apparent. 
Pneumococci are thought to enter the blood stream from 
the nasopharynx. Blood culture at this stage will in severe 



LOBAR PNEUMONIA 


627 


cases produce a growth of the pneumococcus. Later, the 
specific organism can be recovered from the sputum. The 
inflammatory reaction in the lungs passes through four stages, 
and pneumococci can be demonstrated to be present in the 
affected area during the earlier of these. The first is the stage 
of congestion ; the affected portion of the limg is dark red and 
heavy, though it still contains sufficient air to float in water. 
The capillaries are dilated, and the alveoli contain a httle 
fluid resembling blood. The second stage is that of red 
hepatisation, the Ixmg resembling liver in appearance and con- 
sistency. The affected lobe is swollen and of a reddish-brown 
colour, the pleura is dull and covered with a film of yellow 
fibrin. The air sacs are filled with sohd fibrinous clot in which 
are entangled many red cells and some leucocytes. The limg 
tissue is friable, and so heavy that it sinks when placed in water. 
The third stage is that of grey hepatisation ; the convsistency is 
similar to that of the second stage, but the colour is changed to 
a reddish -giey. The size of the affected lobe is further increased, 
the pleura is covered with thick yellow exudate, and an ounce 
or two of turbid fluid may be seen in the pleural cavity. 
Microscopically the clot in the air sacs is found to be crowded 
with leucocytes. The red cells are degenerate and the leucocytes 
contain numerous fat droplets. In the stage of resolution the 
appearance resembles that of grey hepatisation, but has a 
remarkable translucency. Inflammatory blood-borne lesions 
may be found in other organs : pericarditis often accompanies 
left-sided pneumonia, and malignant endocarditis, arthritis, 
and meningitis are sometimes seen ; colitis also occurs. 

The right lung is attacked more often than the left, and 
the lower lobe is usually the one first affected. The inflam- 
mation may spread to a contiguous lobe, or to a lobe of the 
opposite lung. 

Symptoms. — The onset is sudden, often with a rigor, and 
the temperature rises to 103"^ F. or over on the first day. In 
children the onset is commonly indicated by vomiting and 
sometimes by meningism. The p\Texia is continuous and 
lasts from five to nine days, then falls suddenly to normal in 
a few hours ; at the same time pulse and respiration rates 
fall, and the whole aspect of the patient changes from one 
of great distress to one of comfort. This abrupt termination 
is known as the crisis. In more than one -third of the cases 
the s3unptom8 subside gradually and the temperature takes 
several days to reach the normal level — termination by lysis. 
At the onset the patient complains of an agonising pain in the 
side, due to accompanying pleurisy. If diaphragmatic pleurisy 



628 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

is present pain may be referred to the abdomen or to the tip 
of the shoulder. There is a dry, painful cough and tenacious 
mucoid sputum. The patient lies on the affected side, his face 
is flushed, often on one cheek only, labial herpes often appears 
about the third day, the tongue is coated, and the skin dry. 
Breathing is rapid and jerky with an expiratory giunt, and 
the alee nasi dilate with each breath. Although there is 
tachycardia the respiration rate is usually proportionately 
more increased so that the pulse-respiration ratio falls to 
3 : 1 or oven 2:1. Sometimes haemolytic jaundice develops. 
The sputum is usually mucoid at first ; after twenty-four 
hours it becomes blood-stained, and later the bright red 
changes to a pale rust colour. Nocturnal dehriiim is apt 
to occur especially when the upper lobe is affected, and is 
frequent in alcoholics. Constipation, anorexia, and loss of 
weight are common. 

Physical and Radiological Signs. — On inspection of the chest 
the affected side usually moves less than the other, but the 
difference may not be great. In the stage of engorgement the 
only abnormal sign may be slight impairment of resonance, 
but fine rales are often audible, especially after cough. In 
the stages of red and grey hepatisation there is dullness to 
percussion over an area roughly corresponding with a lobe of 
the lung, and auscultation reveals tubular breathing which 
becomes extremely striking when the consolidation is complete. 
A pleural rub is commonly audible. Together with this altera- 
tion of the breath sounds, bronchophony and pectoriloquy are 
heard. These physical signs do not alter at the time of the 
crisis, but later, as resolution of the inflammatory exudate 
takes place, coarse rales (redux crepitations) appear over the 
affected area, and the signs of consolidation become patchy 
and disappear. 

Typically, X-ray shows a more or less uniform opacity 
corresponding in size and iK)sition to the affected lobe. With 
resolution this area la^crjines increasingly mottle<l by re-aerated 
lung. 

Examination of the blood shows a gre.at increase in the 
number of leucocytes, which may number from 20,000 to 60,000 
per cubic millimetre. This increase, which is mainly made up 
of polymorphonuclear cells, is found in the earliest stage of 
the disease and subsides with the crisis. The wliite count is 
of considerable value in estimating the prognosis ; a white 
count of less than 10,000 indicates a very poor chance of 
recovery. 

The urine is scanty and highly coloured, there is a retention 



LOBAR PNEUMONIA 


629 


of chlorides in the body, and a diminution of these salts in the 
urine until after the crisis. Albuminuria is constant, while 
hyaline and granular casts are commonly found. These 
abnormalities are usually due to toxic nephrosis, which is 
often minor in degree. 

Complications. — Lobar pneumonia is often free from com- 
plications, and many will be prevented or be best treated by 
early effective chemotherapy. The following occur : — 

1. Pleurisy occurs regularly, and quite often (particularly 
if chemotherapy has been employed) is followed by effusion. 
Empyema is not infrequent (vide p. 606). 

2. Pericarditis. — This does not differ from other forms of 
acute pericarditis as regards signs and symptoms. The exudate 
is thick and “ buttery and of a yellow or slightly green colour. 
This complication is most often seen in left-sided pneumonia. 
Surgical drainage may bo advisable as in empyema. 

3. Endocarditis. — This rare complication, which may cause 
a second rigor, is found occasionally at autopsy and affects 
particularly the aortic valve. It is always fatal. 

4. Heart-failure. — Congestive heart-failure complicates the 
disease sometimes in adults, and in those who already have 
cardiac disease, 

5. Meningitis. — ^Pneumococcal meningitis usuaUy occurs 
without involvement of the lungs. It can be distinguished from 
other forms of acute meningitis only by bacteriological examina- 
tion of the cerebrospinal fluid. It is often fatal. It must be 
distinguished from the meningism sometimes occurring in 
children in the septicacmic stage of pneumonia, in which there 
may be neck rigidity and Kemig’s sign, but the cerebrospinal 
fluid is normal. 

6. Peritonitis . — Vide p. 488. 

7. Otitis Media. — This may be a complication of pneumonia 
or may arise independently. The treatment is surgical. When 
bilateral mastoid disease occurs the condition is almost in- 
variably fatal. 

8. Arthritis. — The pneumococcus occasionally produces an 
acute suppurative arthritis involving one of the larger joints. 
Aspiration of the pus should be tried before having lecourse to 
open operation. 

Colitis, nephritis, phlebitis with venous thrombosis, parotitis, 
peripheral neuritis, and hsemolytic jatuidice may occur. Very 
rarely the lung tissue may break down to form an abscess, 
or extensive necrosis give rise to gangrene. Occasionally 
the exudate in the alveoh fails to liquefy, resolution does 
not take place, and there is an invasion of connective tissue 



630 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

cells which produce a network of fibrous tissue — unresolved 
pneumonia. Minor degrees of this organisation, resulting in 
fibrosis, are quite common. Bronchial obstruction by debris 
during resolution may lead to atelectasis of the area of lung 
concerned. Numerous cases are met with in which a lobar 
pneumonia is followed after an interval by recurring attacks 
of bronchitis or by spasmodic asthma. A proportion of such 
cases are associated with a secondary bronchiectasis. 

Prognosis. — In children death rarely results from un- 
complicated lobar pneumonia. In adults, as has already been 
pointed out, the prognosis becomes increasingly grave after the 
fortieth year, and in the aged the disease is almost uniformly 
fatal. A robust physique has little influence on the course of 
the disease, but, on the other hand, the temperament of the 
patient is of great importance. Optimism and a determination 
to survive are of great assistance, whereas alarm and despond- 
ency defeat all efforts at treatment. Other unfavourable 
features are alcoholism and chronic diseases, such as diabetes 
or nephritis. 

Though it is always diflScult to forecast the course of any 
individual case, there are, however, certain unfavourable 
indications. Among these are : a very high temperature, or, 
on the other hand, a practically apyrexial course, such as occurs 
in feeble and elderly subjects ; severe toxaemia with delirium 
or cyanosis, especially when appearing early ; involvement of 
several lobes in one or both lungs. In addition, a i> 08 itive 
blood culture indicates massive infection, while a low leucocyte 
count implies a failure of protective reaction. Failure to respond 
to chemotherapy adds to the gravity of the prognosis. 

Diagnosis. — Difficulty sometimes arises in distinguishing 
lobar pneumonia from pleural effusion, atelectasis, pulmonary 
infarction, broncho-pneumonia, acute tuberculous pneumonia, 
and acute septic peritonitis. 

In pleural effusion the distinguishing features are the shape 
of the area of impaired resonance, the obliteration of tactile 
vocal fremitus, and the displacement of the heart and trachea 
away from the affected side of the chest ; an exploratory 
puncture of the pleura will settle the question. In massive 
collapse or atelectasis the diagnostic sign is displacement of 
the heart and trachea towards the dull area in the lung. The 
radiological appearances in pleural effusion and massive collapse 
are quite characteristic {vide pp. 657 and 623 respectively). 
Infarction is met with most frequently a week or two after 
a surgical operation, the onset is abrupt and painful, and is 
followed in a few hours by expectoration of frankly blood- 



LOBAR PNEUMONIA 


631 


stained material, quite different from the rusty sputum which 
appears some days after the onset of a lobar pneumonia. 
Broncho-pneumonia is nearly always bilateral, shows from the 
first patchy mottled shadows on X-ray examination, and 
except in its primary form is characterised by a very different 
temperature range and clinical aspect from lobar pneumonia. 
Acute tuberculous pneumonia may at first be indistinguishable 
from the pneumococcal form, but its long duration will give 
rise to suspicion, and a bacteriological examination of the 
sputum will reveal its true nature. Acute pneumonia of one 
of the lower lobes, with diaphragmatic pleurisy, may give 
rise to severe abdominal pain with vomiting and constipation, 
and present a clinical picture closely resembling that of appendix 
abscess or other acute peritoneal inflammation. Many such 
patients have been subjected to an unnecessary laparotomy 
with dire results. The increased respiration rate is suggestive 
of pneumonia, while a careful clinical and X-ray examination 
of the chest will usually prevent this error. 

Treatment. — Important measures are to ensure abundant 
fresh air and complete rest. The patient is propped up in a 
comfortable position in bed and must be disturbed as little 
as possible. Efficient nursing is essential, and both day and 
night nurses are necessities. 

Chemotherapy has vastly improved the outlook in all 
cases of lobar pneumonia. SulphapjTidine or sulphathiazole 
or other appropriate drug may be given. For an adult either 
of the above-mentioned drugs may be given by mouth as 
follows : 2 grm. every four hours for twenty-four hours, followed 
by 1 grm. six-hourly until there has been no pyrexia for forty- 
eight hours. Details regarding the administration of sulphon- 
amide drugs are given on page 6. In infants and yoimg children 
0*2 grm. per kilogram body-weight daily of sulphapyridine 
in suitably divided doses is satisfactory. 

With cyanosis and respiratory distress continuous inhalation 
of oxy^n is most valuable ; it may be bubbled through 
water in a flowmeter, and administered through a mask, 
bilateral nasal catheters, or the patient may be placed in an 
oxygen-tent. The rate of administration should be adjusted 
so that a concentration of oxygen of more than 40 per cent, 
is maintained in the alveoli. 

Circulatory and cardiac failure may occur. They are usually 
encountered after the fifth day of the illness, and on this 
account many physicians administer digitalis by mouth from 
the commencement, but its value is doubtful. Repeated 
hypodermic injection of so-called cardiac tonics, such as 



632 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

strychnine or camphor, are to be deprecated. Alcohol in 
the form of brandy or champagne is of use to allay anxiety 
and induce sleep ; in alcoholics it is essential for the prevention 
of delirium tremens. Abdominal distension may be a dis- 
tressing feature, adding to the respiratory embarrassment. It 
must be relieved by turpentine enemata, followed, if necessary, 
by intramuscular injections of pituitrin or eserine. 

Insomnia is one of the most dangerous symptoms, and must 
be prevented at all costs. Chloral, bromide, or Dover’s powder 
should be tried, but if they prove ineffective it is not justifiable 
to withhold hypodermic injections of heroin, hyosoine, or morphia. 

Pain due to pleurisy may be relieved by local applications, 
such as antiphlogistine, an electrically heated pad, and by 
strapping the affected side of the chest, or, if necessary, by 
inducing a small pneumothorax. Unproductive cough is best 
treated with a linctus (syr. oodeinac, syr. pruni Virg. aa 3^, 
p.r.n.), while an alkaline expectorant containing potassium 
iodide (pot. iod. gr. iii, ammon. carb. gr. iii, tinct. scillsB n\xx, 
aq. chloroformi ad §ss) renders the expectoration of sputum, 
otherwise thick and viscid, an easier matter. 

Pyrexia is part of the protective reaction and should not 
be treated unless dangerously high, and antipyretics are never 
beneficial. A temperature of 104-6® F. or over indicates the 
need for tepid sponging. 

An abundance of fluid containing glucose should be taken, 
and sufficient light food in the form of milk, jellies, and fruit 
juice with sugar to maintain nutrition. Laxatives are given 
to aid elimination. The possibihty of the patient getting out 
of bed and throwing himself from a window while delirious 
must be guarded against. 

Ample time should be allowed for convalescence, and work 
should not be resumed for about two months after the crisis. 
Psychoneurotic symptoms are common in those who return to 
their routine duties too soon. The patient should be trained 
in and should frequently practise for several months exercises 
to restore full mobility and expansion in the lung. These 
exercises are of the greatest importance in children. If carried 
out as a routine, the incidence of sequelae such as bronchiectasis 
would be considerably reduced. 

Vabebtibs of Lobab Pneitmonia 

Study of the variations in the clinical course of lobar 
pneumonia have suggested that the various types of pneumo- 
cocci tend constantly to give rise to fairly characteristic disease 



- BRONCHO PNEUMONIA 633 

forms. Further investigation is, however, necessary before 
these can be distinguished with any certainty. 

Apical Pneamoida, by which is meant involvement of an 
upper lobe, is seen most commonly in children, in whom it is 
no more dangerous than other forms. In adults this variety 
is said to occur with special frequency in alcoholics and to be 
associated with delmum and a high fatality. In children 
epituberculosis, in young adults pulmonary tuberculosis, and 
in the middle-aged and old bronchial carcinoma may cause 
difficulty in diagnosis. 

Senile or Asthenic Pneamonia occurs in debilitated subjects. 
There may be no pyrexia nor any of the usual symptoms, and 
the outlook is weUnigh hopeless. 

Pneamonia in Children is usually characterised by an 
abrupt onset with convulsions or vomiting. The course is 
only three to five days as a rule, and there is little danger 
to life unless complications occur. Empyema and middle- 
ear disease are, however, much commoner than in adults. 
Empyema develops most commonly between the tenth and 
twentieth day, but in oases developing before the seventh day 
the mortality is high. 


BRONCHO-PNEUMONIA (Lobular Pneumonia) 

JStiology. — Broncho-pneumonia is not a specific disease, 
but is an inclusive term for a variety of conditions characterised 
by scattered areas of inflammation in the lungs. 

Primary Broncho-pneumonia is seen only in children under 
three years of age, and is due to infection with the pneumo- 
coccus. The symptoms and course are the same as those of 
pneumococcal lobar pneumonia. 

Secondary Bronco-pneumonia may occur at any age, and 
affects both sexes equally. It is due to infection with a 
variety of organisms, several of which may usually be found in 
the affected areas of the lungs. The pneumococcus. Strepto- 
coccus hcemolyticus. Staphylococcus aureus, B. influemoe and 
B. friedl&nderi are the most common. Tuberculous broncho- 
pneumonia has been described elsewhere (vide p. 120). The 
infection characteristically reaches the terminal branch and 
air sacs via the respiratory passages ; it is a common complica- 
tion of the infectious fevers such as measles, whooping-cough, 
diphtheria, typhoid, influenza, erysipelas, and smallpox. 
“ Aspiration broncho-pneumonia ” residts from septic material 
being drawn into the bronchioles by the respiratory movements. 



634 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


This material may come from mfected cavities within the lungs, 
for example, lung abscess, or bronchiectasis ; from adjacent 
collections of pus such as hver or subphrenic abscess which 
may rupture into the lung ; it may come from the mouth or 
throat, especially during operations imder a general anaesthetic, 
it may follow vomiting while in a state of insensibility, and it 
is a common sequel in those rescued from drowning. Like 
lobar pneumonia, it often terminates a long illness such as 
diabetes or nephritis in debilitated subjects. 

Pathology and Morbid Anatomy. — ^Tlxere is reason to believe 
that local atelectasis, caused by the plugging of small bronchioles 
with infected material, is a froquent, if not an invariable, 
precursor of broncho-pneumonia. The lesions are bilateral 
in 82 per cent, of cases (Holt), and the parts most commonly 
affected are the posterior portions of the lower lobes ; small 
effusions into the pleural sacs are by no means rare. On the 
surface of the lungs are seen blue depressed atelectatic areas 
which are separated from one another by areas of compensatory 
emphysema, and there is roughening of the pleura over the 
more superficial areas of consolidation. The latter are felt 
as firm nodules when the lungs are handled, and on section 
the consolidated areas project above the out surface. They 
vary in colour and size ; the more recent are dark red and 
the older are grey or yellow. The lesions are grouped round 
a small bronchus which is filled with pus, the air sacs are 
fiWed with exudate, and beyond these are areas of congestion 
and of atelectasis. In severe cases a focus may necrose 
with formation of an abscess, or wide areas of lung 
tissue may become gangrenous, but in milder cases ending 
in recovery the infiammatory changes may subside and leave 
no permanent alteration of structiue. Organisation of the 
exudate, with formation of fibrous tissue, persistent atelectasis, 
and ultimately bronchiectasis, occurs most commonly in children. 

Symptoms. — The onset is usually insidious, but after a fe'w 
days the toxaemia is severe, with languor, tachycaurdia, dyspnoea, 
and cyanosis. The temperature rises gradually and is very 
irregukr, usually higher in the evening than the morning, and 
varying from day to day ; there may be no pyrexia at all, even 
in cases terminating fatally. Pain is seldom severe and it may 
be absent, but there is often restlessness and distress, while 
the respirations are shallow and sometimes as rapid as fifty 
a minute. The sputum is muco-purulent ; it is sometimes 
streaked with blood, and frree hmmoptysis is seen in the 
influenzal form, but rusty sputum like t^t of lobar pneumonia 
does not occur. Drowsiness and delirium are common in oases 



BRONCHO-PNEUMONIA 


635 


showing lividity. The disease runs an irregular course, lasting 
from two to five weeks. Death results fipom exhaustion, 
anoxeemia, or cardiac failure, but at any stage the symptoms 
may subside and recovery take place. Secondary broncho- 
pneumonia has a high mortality. Complications, except heart 
failure, are not frequent, but sequelse in the shape of fibrosis 
and bronchiectasis are common. 

Physical and Radiological Signs. — In the early stages, signs 
of consolidation are usually absent, but there may be obvious 
evidence of bronchitis. Cyanosis is common. After a few 
days, careful auscultation of the lower lobes will generally 
reveal limited areas of tubular breathing with pectoriloquy 
and fine crackling rflJes. If the lesions become confluent, 
extensive signs of consolidation may be obtained. X-ray 
examination shows multiple variously sized scattered shadows 
throughout the lungs, concentrated commonly in the lower 
zones. Many of these may become confluent and so form an 
area of consolidation ; in such areas resolution is relatively 
slow. Co-existent atelectasis may be seen. 

Prognosis. — Primary (pneumococcal) broncho-pneumonia is 
frequently fatal in infants, but in children it runs a short course 
and recovery is the rule. Secondary broncho -pneumonia has 
a more prolonged course, and it must always be regarded as a 
dangerous condition, especially at the two extremes of life. 
Restlessness, lividity, a pulse-rate higher than 130 in an adult, 
and a low blood pressure are signs of grave import. 

Treatment. — Treatment is carried out on the same lines as 
in lobar pneumonia. If on bacteriological examination the 
infecting organism proves to be one which is sensitive to chemo- 
therapy this method should be used in the way described. In 
certain cases it may be advantageous to combine with these 
measures the administration of a vaccine or vaccoid. As the 
fever may last several weeks, special attention must be paid 
to nutrition, and frequent feeds should be given. The diet con- 
sists of milk with prepared cereals, or beaten eggs, jellies, and 
abundance of sugar. The early administration of expectorants, 
together with frequent periods of inhalation of oxygen con- 
taining 7 per cent, carbon dioxide, by preventing the spread of 
lobular atelectasis may abort the disease. Oxygen therapy is very 
important. It should be given by mask or tent for long periods, 
and, if possible, in suflScient amounts to relieve cyanosis and 
dyspnoea. Consecutive heart failure needs energetic treatment. 

Breathing exercises from a very early stage may also diminish 
further development of the infection, and if continued may 
prevent bronolfiectasis. 



636 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


UNRESOLVED PNEUMONIA 

In most cases of acute lobar pneumonia, the exudate in 
the alveoli becomes completely liquefied before the tenth day, 
and the lung soon recovers its normal consistency and function. 
In a few cases, however, this sudden change does not occur, 
especially when bronchial obstruction and atelectasis complicate 
the infection. The persisting exudate becomes invaded by 
blood vessels and connective-tissue cells, so that in course of 
time a network of fibrous tissue is formed in the affected lobe, 
which becomes slirunken, pale, and tough. Infecting organisms 
breed in the stagnant bronchial secretions, and the walls of the 
tubes become softened and dilated. Pneumococci are found in 
the lung, but these are seldom in pure culture, and there is 
usually a mixed infection with the influenza bacillus or the 
Streptococcus viridans. 

Confluent broncho -pneumonia even more commonly fails 
to resolve and so gives rise to fibroid change in the lungs ; in 
such cases the process is more diffuse and affects areas in the 
lower portions of both lungs. It has seemed probable to many 
observers that unresolved pneumonia has occurred more 
commonly since chemotherapy has been in general use for 
pneumonia. 

Symptoms. — Following an attack of broncho or lobar 
pneumonia the patient fails to improve. The pyrexia seldom 
exceeds 102® or 103® F., but it persists for several weeks and 
sometimes for months. There is cough, blood-stained or 
purulent sputum, pain in the side, and dyspncea, but the 
toxsemia is usually less profoimd than that of acute pneumonia. 
The pyrexia subsides gradually, and the patient is able to 
resume his occupation, but there is permanent limitation of his 
capacity for exercise, cyanosis, dyspnoea and a persistent 
productive cough. As the fibroid change develops he becomes 
subject to recurrent attacks of bronchitis, and in some cases to 
spasmodic asthma, while bronchiectatic change is shown by 
purulent sputum and haemoptysis. In the presence of secondary 
bronchiectasis the lung may be the seat of repeated attacks or 
relapses of pneumonic consolidation, which may recur every 
few months for many years, each attack being accompanied by 
toxaemia and pyrexia, lasting fiom six to ten days. 

Physical and Radiological Signs. — During the stage of 
consolidation, the physical signs may be indistinguishable from 
those of acute pneumonia, with dullness, tubular breathing, 
bronchophony, and pectoriloquy over an area corresponding 



UNRESOLVED PNEUMONIA 


637 


to one of the lower lobes. In most cases, however, there is 
dullness corresponding to the affected area, while breath and 
voice sounds are greatly diminished in intensity. As the 
consolidation clears and is replaced by fibroid change, new 
physical signs appear. The fingers become clubbed, the 
affected side of the chest immobile, the intercostal spaces 
narrowed ; the vertebral column is curved laterally with its 
concavity towards the affected side, and the heart is displaced 
towards the fibroid limg. Percussion reveals less impairment 
of resonance, the breath sounds, in the absence of bronchiectasis, 
may be of normal character though less loud than over the 
normal lung, and numerous moist rales are heard over the 
fibrotic lobe. If a relapse of the pneumonic inflammation 
occurs, the affected lobe may again give rise to signs of con* 
solidation, though more frequently dullness to percussion, 
limitation of movement and air entry, and diminished voice 
sounds are encountered. 

Variable X-ray appearances are seen. Commonly with 
consolidation an irregular opacity of fluctuating density is 
found associated with outlying ill-defined smaller shadows. 
Mediastinal structures are commonly displaced toward the 
lesion and the plema is generally markedly thickened. 

Diagnosis. — In the stage of consolidation, pleural effusion 
is often suspected ; but the signs differ in that the cardiac 
impulse is not displaced away from the affected side, the dull 
area corresponds in shape to a lobe of the lung, and does not 
have the oblique upper limit sloping downwards from axilla 
to vertebral column which is typical of effusion ; moreover, 
tactile fremitus is not completely abolished. In the relapsing 
fyp©i clubbing of the fibngers with tachycardia, dyspnoea on 
exertion, and bouts of pyrexia may lead to a mistaken 
diagnosis of infective endocarditis, but careful examination of 
the chest and recognition of the characteristic short periods 
of pyrexia should prevent confusion. When the lung becomes 
fibroid, haemoptysis may suggest phthisis, and many of these 
patients are sent to sanatoria. Distinguishing features are the 
absence of abnormal signs at the apex of the lung even when 
the upper lobe is affected, the absence of tubercle bacilli in the 
sputum, and the entirely different X-ray appearance. 

Prognosis. — The disease is not often fatal, but it leads to 
permanent impairment of health unless treatment is intelligent 
and persevering. Profound toxaemia, especially if accompanied 
by mental disturbance, is an indication of danger. The longer 
resolution is delayed the more probably will bronchiectasis result. 

Treatment. — Bronchoscopy should be performed as soon as 



638 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

it becomes apparent that bronchial obstruction has complicated 
the course of pneumonia. The above-mentioned signs or 
undue delay in resolution will suggest this. If the obstructing 
plug of debris can be found it should be removed by suction. 
The infecting organism should be tested for its resistance to 
the sulphonamides. If it is not resistant a further course 
of chemotherapy may successfully overcome the infection. 
Great benefit is derived fix)m remedial exercises designed to 
distend and restore mobility to the affected lobe. The exercises 
should be commenced at a very early stage and before fibrotic 
changes have become established ; but even years later it 
may be possible to achieve some measure of success. The 
treatment must be carried out frequently, and practised 
assiduously several times daily in some cases for years. 
Distension of the affected lung is obtained by deep breathing 
while the sound side of the thorax is immobilised. The patient 
lies on the healthy side with the hip and shoulder supported 
on a low couch and a hard bolster under the lower ribs. His 
legs are unsupported and the feet rest on the floor, while he 
steadies himself by grasping a support with the uppermost 
arm extended over his head. He then takes a series of slow 
deep breaths, and with each inspiration an assistant lifts him 
clear of the couch by hands placed under the lower part of the 
chest. Thus during inspiration the patient’s weight is thrown 
on the soimd side of his chest, and he is in such a position that 
the ribs of the healthy side are crowded together and fixed, 
but the opposite chest wall is expanded. A minor adjunct 
to the treatment is the inhalation of antiseptic vapours such 
as creosote or turpentine. Autogenous vaccines are often 
administered, but in the writer’s experience have had no effect. 

Other Varieties of Pneumonia 

Pneumonitis. — The use of this term, which means in- 
flammation of the limg, has grown during the last decade. A 
heterogeneous group of conditions are covered, including those 
discussed above and in this section, pulmonary suppuration in 
addition to multilobular atelectasis, and a variety of specific 
infections of the lung. In view of the absence of a precise 
meaning the term is l^st avoided. 

Pat Embolism. — ^Following severe woimds especially those 
associated with bony fractures, more or less extensive fat 
embolism may occur in the lung. The onset is common some 
seventy-two hours after injury, may be associated with evidence 
of multiple emboli elsewhere, e,g.y brain, and skin, and a clinical 



VARIETIES OP PNEUMONIA 639 

course resembling broncho -pneumonia often follows. Fat 

droplets may be identified in the sputum. 

Septic Infarcts. — ^Following operation, or associated with 
septic thrombophlebitis, or pyaemia, multiple infarcts may 
occur throughout the limgs and these may each lead to necrosis 
and abscess formation. A variety of organisms may be con- 
cerned, particularly the staphylococcus. The condition at 
first resembles an acute broncho-pneumonia, later its more 
severe course, the increasing volume of purulent sputum, and 
the radiological appearance of multiple abscess cavities are 
fairly characteristic, while the causal factor may be obvious. 
Appropriate chemotherapy is desirable from an early stage. 

Primary Atypical Pneumonia. — ^This relatively benign dis- 
order which predominantly affects young adults, and which 
occurs sporadically and in epidemics, is now recognised as a 
distinct entity. The onset is insidious, and malaise, headache, 
shivering, and an irritating cough are features. The fever is 
moderate, and subsides by lysis in about a week. Only minor 
physical signs are as a rule present over the chest, though 
slight pharyngitis is often present. Purulent sputum may 
be produced after some days, and then rales and rhonchi can 
be heard. The aetiology and pathology are uncertain, but 
chemotherapy is of no value. Pleurisy, herpes, haemoptysis, 
dyspnoea, tachycardia, and leucocytosis are usually absent. 
X-ray shows as a rule diffuse mottling in one or both lower 
lobes. Therapy is that of bronchitis. The disease is rarely 
fatal and is strikingly free from complications. 

Chronic Pneumonia. — Not infrequently from the onset 
which is insidious pneumonia may be chronic. Variabihty is 
considerable, thus, in the more acute forms progression to lung 
abscess takes place fairly quickly, in others this may occur after 
a long period of very slight toxaemia. In some cases, called 
chronic diffuse broncho-pneumonia by Scadding, a fairly charac- 
teristic clinical course occurred usually wdth a fatal outcome. 
The nature of the infection is inconstant, and several organisms 
may be concerned. Increasing dyspnoea, cough with purulent 
and sometimes blood-stained sputum, irregular, recurrent or 
persistent pyrexia and toxaemia are important features, as 
are pleuritic pain, sweating, anorexia, and loss of weight. 
Tuberculosis, bronchiectasis, bronchial neoplasm, actinomycosis, 
and 83q)hilis of the lung may be with diflSculty excluded. 
Therapy is that of unresolved pneumonia. Benign forms of 
acute and chronic pneumonia are encountered, particularly 
m children and young adults, following upper respiratory 
infections, influenza, and zymotic diseases. 



640 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

PULMONARY ABSCESS AND GANGRENE 

iEtiology. — ^The two usual causes of lung abscess are : 
(1) Aspiration of a foreign body or infected material into the 
bronoM ; and (2) the suppuration of a pneumonic area, which is 
much less common in lobar than in broncho-pneumonia. Other 
and less frequent causes are chronic pneumonia, septic emboli, 
bronchiectasis, bronchial carcinoma or stricture, rupture of 
an empyema or subphrenic abscess, wounds of the lung, perfora- 
tion of the oesophagus, and liver abscess. 

The above conditions may also cause gangrene of the lung 
in cases in which the toxaemia is overwhelming. 

Aspiration abscesses are mostly seen after operations on 
the nose and throat, such as tonsUlectomy, and after the 
extraction of teeth. Experimentally a limg abscess can only 
be produced by the combination of bacterial embolism and 
bronchial obstruction. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^A recent abscess appears as an irregular 
cavity with ragged walls, containmg sloughs of foul-smelling 
dead tissue, surrounded by a more or less extensive area of 
pneumonic consolidation. Older cavities have smooth fibrous 
walls and may be crossed by branches of the pulmonary artery 
and by thrombosed veins. Aspiration abscesses are more 
common in the upper lobes, and post-pneiunonic in the lower. 
Gangrene of the lung differs pathologically from abscess only 
in that it is more extensive, and that the patient often 
dies before cavitation takes place. The lung is cedematous, 
necrotic, and diflduent, and may be black, brown, or greenish- 
grey in colour. A widespread pneumonia is present in the 
remaining viable tissue around the periphery of the gangrenous 
area. 

Symptoms. — In aspiration abscess the symptoms are not 
obscured by a preceding pneumonia ; one or two days after 
the inhalation of infected material, cough and pyrexia develop, 
and after an interval purulent sputum appears. The sputum 
may be tinged with blood, and after rather more than a week 
it becomes extremely offensive ; on examination it resembles 
that found in bronchiectasis, but contains shreds of limg tissue. 
The pyrexia is of the hectic type, cough becomes more and more 
distressing, and large quantities of sputum are brought up 
during the twenty-four hours. After profuse expectoration 
the patient is usually temporarily better. After a month or 
two the symptoms may subside, and the abscess heal ; more 
frequently it fails to do so and the clinical features of advanced 




J’LATK iMi 

P»ilmonarv .iPsfc.SH situated in tie* li^ht up[K*r lobe (axillary segment), d’lie fdin 
shows a well-marked fluid le\el and ch*ns<* surroimdin^ pni'uiuonia. 


[ 7V» ffirr ]Ktfjf b 1 1 



GROWTHS OF THE LUNG AND BRONCHI 641 

bronchiectasis develop. Death occurs either from broncho- 
pneumonia, profuse haemorrhage, cerebral abscess, or from 
gangrene of the Ixmg. The last condition is manifested by 
high sustained p3rrexia, rapid loss of flesh, and foetid sputum 
which is fluid and of a greenish or dark brown colour. 

Physical and Radiological Signs. — K the abscess is near the 
surface there will be signs of consolidation, or, more commonly, 
a pleural rub associated with limited movement, impaired note, 
a poor air entry, and r41es. In some cases of chronic lung 
abscess the physical signs of a cavity may be present. Clubbing 
of the fingers soon develops. 

Before bronchial perforation has occurred X-ray tilms will 
usually show an ill-defined often nearly spherical dense opacity. 
When fi*ee bronchial communication exists, an air-containing 
cavity will be present, perhaps showing a fluid level, surrounded 
by more or less dense consolidation {vide Plate 26). A slough 
may be seen within the cavity. An opaque foreign body may 
be shown to be present. Bronchography may reveal secondary 
bronchiectasis, but the oil only rarely enters the abscess. 

Diagnosis. — The history of pneumonia or of a recent upper 
respiratory operation, the toxaemia, offensive sputum, and the 
above signs are characteristic. The condition has to be distin- 
guished from empyema, specially interlobar empyema, neoplasm, 
tuberculosis, and the more chronic forms of pneumonia. 

Treatment. — Bronohoscopio examination is essential, as it 
may reveal a foreign body or a neoplasm as the primary cause 
of the abscess. About 30 per cent, of all oases of lung abscess 
heal, either spontaneously or as the result of purely medical 
treatment. This latter includes postural drainage, creosote 
inhalations, expectorants, and such drugs as neoarsphenamine 
and emetine. Sulphonamides are of relatively slight value, 
but it is likely that penicillin will prove to be more useful. 

The majority of oases, however, fail to react to these 
measures and, though each case must be judged individually, 
it is in general true that surgical intervention is more likely to 
be successful than continued medical therapy if the abscess 
shows no sign of healing after two months. 

Surgical therapy includes external drainage, lobectomy, 
pneumonectomy, and thoracoplasty. 

NEW GROWTHS OF THE LUNG AND BRONCHI 

Secondary Neoplasms. — Secondary growths are more 
common than primary. Carcinomatous deposits may be 
secondary to cancer of the prostate, testis, breast, stomach, 
41 



642 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

rectum, or any other organ, and are frequent with h 3 rper- 
nephroma. Secondary sarcomata are usually either melanotic 
or metastases from a tumour in one of the bones. 

Secondary growths are usually numerous and scattered in 
both lungs ; those on the surface form umbilicated projections, 
while the deeper ones appear as pale roimded nodules. They 
cause an inci-easing dyspnoea, cachexia, and fever. Phyaical 
signs are often slight or absent until pleural involvement 
occurs. X-ray often shows multiple scattered “ puff ball ’’ 
shadows. The pleura is affected in the great majority of the 
cases with effusion of fluid which may be clear, blood-stained, 
or purulent. Endothelioma of the lung and the more malignant 
primary sarcoma are known. 

Bronchial Neoplasms. — The bronchial carcinoma is one of 
the more important forms of cancer, and is by far the commonest 
primary intrathoracic neoplasm. The incidence is highest in 
the fifth and sixth decades of life, and about four in every 
five occur in males. 

The growth arises from the mucosa or from a mucous 
gland of the bronchus, usually near the hilum, and leads to 
bronchial obstniction, at first partial, later complete with 
atelectasis and secondary pneumonia, bronchiectasis, or abscess. 
The growth may spread to local structures and frequently 
involves the pleura. In such cases a pleural effusion usually 
occurs which is commonly blood-stained, occasionally serous, 
and not infrequently secondarily infected. One in five of 
these growths originates in a small bronchus peripherally. 

Metastasis occurs early in the mediastinal glands, and may 
spread thence U) other lymph glands, while secondary deposits 
are commonly also found in the liver, brain, bones, kidneys, 
and other organs. The primary growth may be of the 
undifferentiated “oat celled” type, or show attempts at the 
formation of alveoli, or it may undergo metaplasia giving 
rise to a squamous -celled carcinoma. 

Primary innocent tumours of the bronchi are rare, and 
affect the sexes equally. They include adenoma, fibroma, 
Ii]X)ma, and chondroma. More frequently innocent tumours 
within the thorax are extra-pulmonary (vide p. 671). Innocent 
bronchial tumours cause cough, haunoptysis, and ultimately 
bronchial obstruction with all its consequences. 

SymptomB. — The early symptoms of bronchial carcinoma 
are cough, haemoptysis, vague ill-health, and thoracic or upper 
abdominal discomfort. Later, dyspnoea, pain, lassitude, fever, 
weakness, and exi>ectoration are added. The sputum is often 
blood-stained, the blood being dark and intimately mixed with 



GROWTHS OF THE LUNG AND BRONCHI 643 

inucopus, giving an appearance which has been likened to 
prune juice. Pain is generally not very severe, but it is remark- 
ably persistent and differs from that of other pleuritic con- 
ditions in that it does not subside when effusion takes place. 
Dyspnoea may be extremely distressing, and may be accompanied 
by stridor, or a brassy cough. Wasting is not often severe. 
Secondary involvement of the mediastinal glands may lead to 
the mediastinal pressure syndrome described on page 670. 

In many instances the predominating symptoms are due 
to septic absorption from pulmonary suppuration, from 
empyema, or the consequences of metastases. Death results 
in from six to eighteen months from cachexia, metastasis, 
right-sided heart failure, or sudden haemorrhage into a pulmonary 
abscess. 

Physical and Radiological Signs. — Effusion of fluid into the 
pleural cavity often masks the signs of the bronchial carcinoma. 
Aspiration may show the fluid to be blood-stained, and 
cytological examination may reveal tumour cells in the centri- 
fugalised deposit, or in the particles of tissue remaining in the 
lumen of the needle. When there is no effusion, the signs are 
variable and include clubbing of the Angers, cyanosis, hjq)er- 
trophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, and those of bronchial 
obstruction with its sequelae {vide p. 622). 

To postero -anterior and lateral X-ray examination localised 
emphysema, or atelectasis of part or the whole of a lung, with 
or without a hilar opacity, may be seen. On other occasions 
an opacity spreading out from the hilum is found, while a 
peripheral neoplasm commonly appears as a somew hat spherical 
uniform opacity. Secondaries in the mediastinal glands, septic 
complications in the lung, and pleural effusion frequently 
complicate these Andings. Bronchography may localise the 
site of the growth, as may tomography {vide Plate 24, p. 616). 

Diagnosis. — In no disease is early diagnosis more desirable. 
Any of the early symptoms mentioned, if they occur in a patient 
past middle age, should arouse suspicion, and lead to investiga- 
tion. At this stage there are no signs as a rule, and often an 
X-ray of the chest is normal. None the less, bronchoscopy 
and examination of the sputum by Dudgeon’s method for car- 
9inoma cells may identify a growth. The only bronchial 
neoplasm revealed with certainty by fluorography or X-ray 
examination before symptoms and signs arise is the peripheral 
type of innocent or malignant tumour. With the common type 
of bronchial carcinoma arising near the hilum, once bronchial 
obstruction has developed the well marked and often character- 
istic symptoms, signs, and X-ray appearances set forth above 



644 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


arise. Bronchographic localisation with lipiodol is then seldom 
necessary, since the growth is accessible to bronchoscopy 
which \^ill permit histological examination of a biopsy specimen. 
At the same time the distance of the growth from the carina, 
the fixity of the bronchus, and local distortion from glandular 
secondaries can be assessed, and will be of therapeutic and 
prognostic importance. In those cases in which despite the 
above doubt as to diagnosis still persists a thoracotomy may 
be justified. 

Treatment.^ — In the great majority of cases treatment has 
at present to be palliative. It consists in the relief of pain with 
morpliia when that becomes necessary, of oxygen therapy 
for dyspnoea, and the provision of comfort by good nursing. 
Irradiation, by radon or radium implanted locally into the 
growth, or by X-ray therapy, is as a rule only palliative, and 
may reheve pain, or diminish sepsis by making the bronchus 
again patent. Occasionally, when the site of the growth permits 
and when diagnosis is sufficiently earl}% pneumonectomy may 
be curative. 


THE PNEUMOKONIOSES 

Pneumokoniosis is the term given to changes in the 
limgs resulting from the inhalation of certain dusts. 

While a wide variety of organic dusts can cause bronchitis, 
and dusts such as those of arsenic and lead are dangerous on 
account of their poisonous properties, a hmited group only, 
and in particular silica, causes the special forms of fibrosis of 
the lungs with which we are concerned. 

The following varieties are described, depending on the 
nature of the dust causing the disease : Anthracosis (coal), 
asbestosis (asbestos), lithosis (stone), siderosis (iron and other 
metallic dusts), and silicosis (silica). 

Anthracosis is the most common, and is due to the inhalation 
of particles of carbon. It is foimd in all town-dwellers, and 
to a marked degree in coal miners. The carbon is present in 
the lymphatics, pulmonary lymph nodes, and in the mediastinal 
lymph glands. In advanced cases it is also found under the 
pleural surface of the lungs, and may even choke alveoli. 
Anthracosis, if uncomplicated by silicosis, produces little 
structural damage apart from choking the lymphatics, and it 
causes no symptoms. There is reason to believe that it may 
afford some protection against tuberculosis. 

The inhalation of dust containing silica caus^ in time a 
characteristic nodular fibrosis of the lungs. The extent and 





THE PNEUMOKONIOSES 


045 


speed of production of this change have been shown to be 
directly proportional to the quantity of the dust inhaled and 
to its content of silica. It has also been shown that the patho- 
genic particles are always less than 10 microns in diameter 
and usually much smaller. Phagocytic cells remove the 
particles from the alveoli, and pass in the lymph stream into 
the regional lymph nodes and glands draining the lungs. There 
a low-grade inflammation is set up by the contained silica, which 
eventually results in a fibrosis which chokes the lymphatic 
system. The fibrous replacement of the peripheral nodes at 
the bifurcations of the bronchioles gives rise to the characteristic 
nodular ” radiological appearance {vidp. Plate 27). Further 
inhalation in the presence of an inadequate lymph drainage 
results in more massive fibrosis within the lung parenchyma 
itself with a consequent massive widespread fibrosis character- 
istic of the advanced stages. 

The change is slow and progressive, and may take from 
two to twenty or more years to be demonstrable. Clinically 
dyspnoea is the outstanding symptom. It at first limits and 
later abolishes any capacity for w^ork, and with it is associated 
an unproductive cough, transient pleural pains, and bronchial 
colds. Cyanosis is present only in advanced stages of the 
disease. The physical signs are never commensurate with the 
symptoms of the disease, but in an advanced case the thoracic 
wall tends to be rigid, smoothly flattened in front, with raised 
shoulders, and movement is symmetrical but very limited. 
The percussion note may be resonant from associated 
emphysema, though patches of dullness from thickened pleura 
are not uncommon. The breath sounds are vesicular, distant, 
and characteristically dry. There is no fever, and except in 
extreme degrees of the disease, no tachycardia, asthenia, 
expectoration, or haemoptysis, all of which may quickly appear 
upon the supervention of tuberculosis, to which cases of 
silicosis are especially prone. Throughout the disease the 
sputum contains silica particles which may be demonstrated 
microscopically, using polarised light. 

Siderosis, lithosis, and many examples of anthracosis are 
even slower in development. The pathology is similar, 
and it seems probable that they are examples of silicosis 
in which the choking of the lymphatic drainage of the 
lungs by a primary silicotic fibrosis is complicated by the 
concurrent retention of metallic, calcareous, and carbon 
particles respectively. 

Asbestosis is the best known of several rare types of 
l)neumokoniosis caused by silicates. The pathology is probably 



646 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

essentiaUy similar to the above, but the fibrosis is always 
more diffuse. RadiologioaUy nodulation is absent, and a 
reticular fibrosis, pleural thickening, diaphragmatic involve- 
ment, and a shaggy heart outline predominate. The clinical 
signs and symptoms are those of silicosis save that the disease 
usually takes longer to develop. The sputum, however, on 
.simple microscopic examination contains “ asbestos bodies ” 
which characteristically resemble brown translucent elon- 
gated dumb-bells ; their presence is diagnostic of the 
condition. 

All forms of pneumokoniosis tend to be steadily progr^ive, 
and the prognosis is unfavourable unless the individual is 
removed from the danger of further inhalation in the early 
stages of the disease. Complications include tubercidoeis, 
chronic bronchitis, emphysema, bronchiectasis, and heart 
failure. 

The most important therapeutic measures are preventive. 
They include devices which reduce the amount of dust inhaled, 
by the use of respirators and masks, efficient ventilation, and 
the free sprinkling of water to prevent the formation of dust. 
Periodical medical and radiological examination of all who 
are employed in occupations with this hazard permits the 
exclusion of phthisis, and allows the diagnosis of pneumo- 
koniosis to be made early in the disease. In established oases 
the treatment is that of chronic bronchitis and emphysema, 
while in advanced cases therapy is piirely palliative. 


ALLERGIC CONDITIONS OF THE RESPIRATORY 

SYSTEM 

Some individuals are especially prone to allergic phenomena, 
i.e., to sensitisation by foreign proteins, and suffer from 
anaphylactoid symptoms when exposed to the protein to 
which they have teoome sensitised. Manifestations in the 
respiratory tract are of two types, hay fever and spasmodic 
asthma. These two diseases are common in certain families, 
some members of which may be subject to one form and some 
to the other, while some unfortunate individuals are subject 
to both hay fever and asthma. The symptoms often commence 
in early childhood, but the onset may be delayed until the 
second decade or later ; after the fortieth year susceptibility 
to hay fever diminishes and the disease tends to die out. The 
incidence of both hay fever and asthma is highest in educated 
persons of nervous temperament and in town^wellers. 



DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 647 


HAY FEVER 

Hay fever is a severe temporary catarrhal condition of the 
mucous membranes of the nose and throat and of the con- 
junctiva, which is due to sensitisation to the pollen of certain 
plants. 

iEtiology. — Sensitisation of a susceptible individual takes 
place as a result of exposure to large quantities of wind-home 
pollen, and the symptoms recur each year and coincide with 
the pollination of the particular plant causing the disease. 
In nearly all cases this pollen belongs to one of the common 
grasses, e.g., timothy grass in Great Britain and ragweed in 
America. Timothy grass pollinates in May, June, and July, 
and it is in these months that the symptoms occur. In the 
United States the disease is also caused by tree-pollen in April, 
and by the Compositae (daisies, etc.) in the late summer. 

Sensitive subjects develop symptoms of hay fever when 
the protein of the specific pollen is applied to the mucous 
membrane of the nose, throat, or conjunctiva, or when it is 
injected subcutaneously. Identification of this pollen is best 
carried out by skin tests, in which the various pollens or their 
extracts are injected intradermally or are applied to superficial 
scratches on the skin of the forearm. A positive reaction is 
shown by an urticarial wheal surrounding the scratch. If 
more than one pollen provokes a positive reaction, the test 
should be repeated with increasing dilutions of the extracts, 
when the specific pollen will be found to give a positive test in 
dilutions often ten times as high as the others. 

Symptoms. — ^The symptoms recur at the same season each 
year, usually firom May to July. They do not persist throughout 
this period ; there are periods of remission and exacerbation 
corresponding with variations in the amount of pollensuspended 
in the air. The attacks commence with itching and burning 
sensations in the eyes and nose, followed by profuse laohryma- 
tion, running from the nose, and sneezing. There is usually 
some malaise, and occasionally severe headache and depression. 
The affected mucoiis membranes become red and swollen, and 
some oedema of the eyelids is common. 

Diagnosis. — ^The condition is distinguished from coryza by 
its regular recurrence in the early summer, and the diagnosis 
is confirmed by skin sensitisation tests with the grass pollens. 

Treatment. — ^Treatment should be commenced twelve weeks 
before the date when symptoms are expected. The specific 
|>ollen having been identified, further skhi tests are m^e to 



648 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

determine the greatest dilution which will provoke a local 
reaction. An extract which is just too dilute to provoke a 
reaction is then selected, and 2 minims of this solution are 
injected subcutaneously. Further injections are given at five- 
or seven-day intervals, the dose being at first doubled on 
each occasion ; if 83 miptoms of hay fever follow an injection, 
the next dose must be reduced and further increase made with 
caution. Pro-seasonal treatment is the most useful, but in 
some oases benefit is derived fi:om a continuance of the injections 
throughout the period of pollination. This treatment is 
successful in diminishing the intensity of the symptoms in the 
great majority of oases, and completely prevents them in about 
10 per cent. ; it must be repeated each year. 

When the symptoms have become manifest, they can only 
be abolished by removal of'the patient firom contact with the 
specific pollen by sending him to a mountain resort or on a 
sea voyage. He may obtain some relief by wearing dark 
glasses, by the subcutaneous injection of increasing doses of 
adrenalin, spraying the nose and conjunctivse with a solution 
of adrenalin 1 in 6,000, or by taking | gr. tablets of ephedrine 
hydrochloride twice a day. Instillation into the nostrils of a 
solution of 6 gr. of ephedrine in 1 oz. of liquid paraffin often 
gives relief. 


ASTHMA 

Spasmodic asthma is characterised by reciurent attacks 
of dyspnoea in which the expiratory movements are laboured 
and inefieotive. The dyspnoea is due to partial obstruction 
of the smaller bronchi by contraction of the plain muscle in 
their walls, and by turgescenoe of their mucous lining. Excep- 
tional cases occur in which the d 3 ^pnoea is inspiratory. 

fliiiology. — ^The musculature of the bronchi is innervated by 
the vagus, and experimental stimulation of this nerve, either 
peripheral or cent^, causes contraction of the smaller tubes, 
with all the symptoms of an asthmatic attack. Expiration, 
being a comparatively feeble and passive act, is interfered with 
to a greater extent than inspiration ; consequently the lungs 
become over-distended with residual air, and dyspnoea with 
cyanosis results. 

Asthma is regarded as an allergy comparable with urticaria 
or hay fever, and has in many instances been shown to be 
caused by sensitisation to specific foreign proteins. It is 
also significant that psychoneurosis, particularly anxiety 
neurosis, commonly complicates the disorder, and furthermore 



ASTHMA 649 

a family history of the disease or of a related allergic condition 
is very frequently encountered. 

The allergen causing asthma is often one which is inhaled 
in the form of dust. The most provocative are dust-proteins, 
dandruffs from the coats of animals, and poultry, pollen from 
certain plants, and powdered organic matter such as moulds, 
or feathers. The proteins of infecting organisms are responsible 
for a large proportion of the cases. In these the organisms are 
often recoverable in pure growth from the sputum following 
an asthmatic attack ; amongst those commonly found are the 
Streptococcus viridaus, pneumococcus, Friedlander’s bacillus, 
and Micrococcus caUirrhalis. In a small group the attacks are 
due to ingested protein in the form of eggs, one of the cereals, 
or the flesh of a mammal, bird, or fish. Rarely an injection 
of serum, a bite or sting may initiate an attack. 

The allergen sometimes is suggested by careful analysis of 
the history of the case ; the symptoms may date from an attack 
of pneumonia or bronchitis ; attacks may occur only when the 
patient stays in certain localities or houses where he comes in 
contact with one of the domestic animals, or when he partakes 
of a certain food. Confirmatiorji should be sought in skin tests, 
as described in the preceding section on Hay Fever, but instead 
of a pollen extract, the suspected proteins are applied to the 
cutaneous incisions direct, and a drop of 10 per cent, sodium 
hydroxide solution is added in order to render them soluble. 
It is generally agreed that food proteins are seldom the cause of 
asthma which commences after childhood. Cases of asthma 
which clearly follow an acute respiratory infection should not 
be confused with those of asthmatic bronchitis, in which bron- 
chial spasm occurs in subjects of chronic bronchitis and 
emphysema. Asthmatic bronchitis differs from spasmodic 
asthma in that the distress is as much inspiratory as expiratory ; 
the attacks do not begin and end with the same abruptness, 
and the patient is not free from signs and symptoms of respira- 
tory disease between the attacks. 

Asthma is commonly more severe during menstruation ; 
it is less severe, or absent, during pregnancy or a febrile iUness. 

In infants and some -children asthma is acc/Ompanied by 
bronchiolitis and bronchitis ; in other affected children eczema 
or prurigo are associated. 

Symptoms. — At all ages the paroxysm occurs most commonly 
during the night ; the patient is awakened by a feeling of suffo- 
cation, he sits up, and his breathing becomes more and more 
laboured ; the expirations become longer and more wheezing, 
and in spite of bringing all the accessory muscles into play. 



660 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

fail to deflate the lungs before being interrupted by another 
short and spasmodic inspiration. The lungs become more and 
more distended and the thoracic movements more restricted ; 
the face is pale and anxious and the finger-tips cyanosed, but 
the pulse-rate is little affected. At the height of the attack the 
patient is shaken by a paroxysmal cough ; the sputum is 
at first scanty and viscid, then the secretion becomes more 
fluid and copious, the spasm relaxes, and the patient sinks 
back relieved but exhausted. Vomiting often terminates the 
attack in a child. Attacks last from a few minutes to several 
hours, and may recur the same night, or only after an interval 
of weeks or months. After many attacks of ordinary duration, 
an attack may fail to terminate spontaneously, and continuing 
for several days and nights {status asthmaticns) may prevent 
sleep and the taking of food, and yield only to drastic treat- 
ment, or in rare instances may even result in death from heart 
failure. 

In other cases persistent wheezing with dyspnoea intensified 
by emotion or exertion, and an ineffective cough may largely 
replace acute attacks. 

Physical and Radiological Signs. — During an attack the 
thorax is distended and the respiratory excursions are much 
diminished in spite of forcible muscular efforts ; there are 
hyper-resonance and obhteration of cardiac dullness. The 
inspiratory murmur is short and feeble, while expiration is 
greatly prolonged and accompanied by inniunerable fine and 
medium rhonchi ; later rales predominate. Cyanosis, sweating, 
tachycardia, and a subnormal temperature are frequent. 

The sputum is at first viscid, and comes up in white lumps, 
the so-called “ pearls of Laennec.*' When unrolled, these 
lumps are found to consist of mucous spirals, forming moulds 
of the smaller tubes. In addition to these oasts, which are 
known as Cursohmann’s spirals, there may be eosinophil 
leucocytes and octahedral crystals (Charoot-Leyden crystals). 
Eosinophilia, varying from 5 to 30 per cent, of the total white 
cells occurs, as does hypochlorhydria. These characteristics 
of the sputum, gastric juice, and blood-count are inconstant. 

The radiological findings during an attack are those of 
emphysema ; between attacks the appearance of the lungs may 
be normal. 

Prognosis. — In children asthma sometimes clears up 
spontaneously, but, unlike hay fever, it does not show the 
same tendency to disappear after middle age. When spon- 
taneous recovery takes place it is usually due to a change of 
tha patient’s environment. It is doubtfrd whether deatU has 



ASTHMA 


651 


ever been oaused by uncomplicated asthma ; but in old- 
standing cases chronic bronchitis and emphysema nearly always 
develop, and then status asihmaticus may be fatal. Such 
patients are also prone to broncho -pneumonia. Occasionally 
a lasting cure may be effected by suitable treatment. Complete 
recovery,* however, is rare and limited to the relatively early 
case. 

Diagnosis. — ^Any of the causes of obstruction of the larynx, 
trachea, large or small bronchi may simulate asthma. The 
family and personal history, the nocturnal paroxysmal attacks, 
skin reactions, eosinopliilia, and response to adrenalin will 
usually characterise asthma. 

Attacks of breathlessness with wheezing respirations occur 
in association with severe disease of the heart or kidneys. 
In “ cardiac asthma {vide p. 557) there are often signs and 
symptoms of left ventricular failure, while renal asthma ’’ 
is accompanied by signs of nephritis with uraemia, such as 
renal retinitis, albuminuria, and a high blood urea. In both 
cardiac hypertrophy and raised blood pressure are common. 

Treatment. — Prevention of Attacks . — If the history, skin 
tests, and elimination diets have indicated a specific allergen 
much can be done to avoid or remove the irritant. Examples 
include, for instance, the substitution of rubber or kapok 
bedding for feather stuffed articles ; the vacuum cleaning of 
rooms ; and the use of cosmetics free from orris root. 

Most asthmatics should accustom themselves to wide open 
windows, should shun crowded entertainments, and should 
be vaccinated agaiiist common catarrhal infections. Desen- 
sitisation is often necessary. If the patient, as is common, is 
found to be sensitive to more than one inhalent allergen a 
solution of the appropriate extracts is used ; or if one, such as 
pollen, is found to be specific for the case it should be employed 
alone. A course of subcutaneous injections slowly increasing 
in amount may be given twice weekly over several weeks, or, if 
necessary, may be concentrated into a few days if close medical 
supervision is provided, and adrenalin (3 minims of 1 in 1,000 
solution) is injected at the same time to prevent an asthmatic 
reaction. Similarly, in cases due to infection an autogenous 
vaccine from the sputum should be used. The first dose should 
be small, amounting to 2 or 3 million organisms, and subsequent 
doses may be increased by 2 million organisms on each occasion. 

Many asthmatics find that swallowing | to 1 gr. of ephedrine 
just before going to sleep prevents attacks of nocturnal asthma 
developing. The tablets should be swallowed whole and not 
dissolved in the mouth, 



662 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


Encouragement from the medical attendant is always 
valuable ; in selected cases psychotherapy may be of help. 
In asthma due to food proteins the only effective treatment 
is avoidance of the offending foodstuff. 

Non-specific protein therapy in the form of intramuscular 
injections of peptone is occasionally beneficial, as may also be 
a similar injection of 10 c.c. of the patient^s blood. 

Constitutional Treatment , — ^Measures for the improvement 
of the patient’s general condition are sometimes remarkably 
effective in diminishing the tendency to asthma ; sources of 
sepsis should be dealt with, hypochlorhydria should be remedied, 
and a hygienic regime should be ordered. Heavy meals must 
not be taken in the evening, as they are likely, by producing 
gastric distension, to provoke attacks. Climate has an important 
influence on many asthmatics, and if a locality is found in which 
the patient is free from attacks, he should, if possible, make 
his home there. Operations on the nose and throat should be 
performed only for the elimination of gross sepsis. Women 
may become affected by asthma on reaching the menopause, 
and such cases appear sometimes to be cured by administration 
of thyroid extract. Sleeplessness should be relieved by bromides 
or luminal, and a codeine linctus may be used for nocturnal 
cough. 

Many asthmatic subjects are more liable to attacks when 
lying dovTi ; they should therefore learn to sleep with the 
head and shoulders raised on four or five pillows. 

Breathing exercises are very valuable. The correction of 
faulty posture and muscle relaxation are first taught. Then 
exercises are learnt and practised in order to co-ordinate and 
re-educate muscle action involved in tlie act of breathing, 
particularly in expiration. 

Treatment of an attack . — Adrenalin is incomparably the best 
drug both for the relief and abortion of an asthmatic attack. 
It is given hypodermically, and 1 or 2 minims of a 1 in 1,000 
solution often give complete relief if administered as soon 
as the symptoms commence ; if the attack is fully developed 
3 or 4 minims should be injected and, without withdrawing the 
needle, a further minim given every thirty seconds until relief 
is obtained. It is therefore advisable to train the patient to 
give himself the injection, and he may carry the necessary 
materials about with him. In some cases >ephedrine gives 
similar relief, and it has the advantage that it can be taken by 
mouth, the dose being I gr- (i to J gr. for a child) of ephedrine 
hydrochloride. Proprietary remedies usually contain stra- 
monium, the fumes of which are inhaled from a cigarette or 



SPONTANEOUS PNEUMOTHORAX 


653 


ignited powder. Injections of morphia and other narcotic 
drugs should very rarely be given for asthma ; they are less 
effective than adrenalin and are apt to demoralise the patient. 

For status asthmaticus, however, if frequent small doses 
of adrenalin should fail, injections of a solution containing 
J gr. of morphine, i gr. of atropine, adrenalin (1 in 1,000) to 10 
minims, may be given every five minutes in 1 minim doses until 
the attack is relieved or the 10 minims have been injected. 

For oral administration the most useful drugs, apart from 
ephedrine, are tincture of lobelia, grindelia, or stramonium in 
15-minim doses, combined in a mixture with potassium iodide. 


DISEASES OF THE PLEURA 
Spontaneous Pneumothorax 

In some instances the entry of air into the pleural cavity, 
in the absence of external trauma, is due to rupture of a 
tuberculous pulmonary focus into the pleura. By this means 
a fistulous opening is formed, connecting the pleural cavity 
with one of the smaller bronchi. With each inspiratory 
movement air is drawn into the pleural cavity and the lung 
recedes from the chest wall. If the opening is a valvular one, 
a considerable positive pressure will be attained, and the 
heart and mediastinum will be displaced to such an extent that 
death may quickly result. Tension pneumothorax is rare, 
since witli collapse of the lung the opening usually becomes 
sealed before the intrapleural pressure rises to a dangerous 
height (Plate 28). 

The onset may be insidious and the condition may be 
discovered accidentally, but usually it is marked by a sudden 
stabbing pain in the side, diirspnosa, cough, pyrexia, and effusion 
of fluid into the pleural sac. Artificial pneumothorax is quite 
often complicated by the spontaneous variety. 

The majority of cases of spontaneous pneumothorax, 
however, are due to causes other than tuberculosis. The 
commonest is probably the rupture of an emphysematous 
bulla, an accident which is apt to recur in the same patient, 
often after an interval of years. In such cases a fluid reaction 
is rare unless as very occasionally happens the rent in the 
lung involves a blood-vessel of considerable size, and a hsemo- 
pneumothorax results. 

Physic^ Signs. — The signs vary in proportion to the amount 
of air which gains entrance to the pleural cavity. A small 
collection, limited by pre-existing pleural adliesions, may defy 



654 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


detection except by stereoscopic skiagraphy. Larger amounts, 
even if sufficient to cause generalised collapse of the lung, 
may be overlooked by good clinicians ; for when the intrapleural 
pressure remains negative, there may be no abnormal signs 
whatever, except diminution of the breath-sounds in the lower 
part of the affected hemi-thorax. With a considerable spon- 
taneous pneumothorax, however, we find all the classic signs 
which make diagnosis easy. On inspection there is impairment 
of movement and the heart and trachea are displaced towards 
the unaffected side. The sternomastoid muscle is prominent 
on the side of the lesion. On percussion the note is hyper- 
resonant ; on auscultation the breath -sounds are absent or 
distant and amphoric in type. An amphoric cough and tinkling 
rales are heard if a bronchopleural fistula is present. If an 
assistant press a coin flat on the chest wall and strike it with a 
second coin, the examiner, listening with his stethoscope over 
another part of the pneumothorax, may hear a clear, ringing 
note, the bell sound ” or “ coin sound.'’ Voice conduction 
is usually not materially altered. 

X-raj^ shows peripherally an absence of lung markings 
and the lung collapsed toward the hilum on the affected side. 
On screening the mediastinal displacement is seen to be most 
marked on inspiration {vide Plate 28). 

Treatment. — The patient is confined to bed, and if he is 
suffering from shock should be given morphia and kept warm. 
If the pleural cavity is overdistended and the patient dis- 
tressed, air must be withdrax^m, and temporarily a continuoiis 
water-sealed drainage may be required for the “ tension ” 
type. If examination shows the collapsed lung to be tuberculous, 
and the other one to be reasonably healthy, the pneumothorax 
may be beneficial, and it should be maintained by periodical 
injection of further quantities of air. In the absence of clinic^al 
or X-ray evidence of pulmonary disease, the pneumothorax 
is probably non-tuberculous and may be allowed to absorb. 

Hydro-pneumothorax.— In many cases of artificial and 
spontaneous pneumothorax, serofibrinous fluid collects in the 
pleural cavity after some time. 1’he presence of the fluid 
is often detected by the patient, who notices a splashing 
sensation inside the chest when he moves. On examination 
this splash may be heard by shaking the patient during 
auscultation with the stethoscope. Percussion reveals dullness 
above the diaphragm, and the upper limit of the dull area 
encircles the affect^ side of the chest horizontally. On tilting 
the patient to one side, the fluid moves and again presents a 
horizontal surface, thus differing from uncomplicat^ pleural 





PLEURISY 


655 


effusions which seldom move at all in response to gravity* 
The skiagraphic appearance is characteristic ; the fluid shows 
as a dense opacity at the bottom of the chest, and above its 
sharply defined horizontal surface the clear translucent pneumo- 
thorax cavity is seen, with the lung collapsed about its root 
{vide Plate 29). 

Treatment.~A sterile effusion in such cases has the signifi- 
cance of uncomplicated pleurisy with effusion, and requires 
comparable treatment. 

Pyo-pneumothorax. — In some cases infected pmnilent 
fluid collects in the pleura after spontaneous pneumothorax. 
The patient is feverish and toxaemic. Investigation will usually 
show the lesion to be tuberculous. Therapy is that of tubercu- 
lous empyema, unless a simple pyogenic cause is proved, in 
which case drainage is needed. 

Pleurisy 

Pleurisy is an inflammation of the pleura, which may 
become covered with a fibrinous membrane — “ dry pleurisy ” 
— or separated by a liquid exudate. If the fluid is clear, 
the condition is known as “ pleurisy with effusion and, if 
purulent, as “ empyema.” These conditions are to be dis- 
tinguished from non-inflammatory transudates such as 
hydrothorax, hsemothorax, and chylothorax, which are fluid 
collections resulting from lesions other than pleurisy. 

Mtiology . — When the evidence of inflammation is confined 
to the pleura, the condition is termed * primary pleurisy.” 
This not infrequently follows trauma or exposure to cold, but 
in many instances is due to tuberculosis. 

Secondary pleurisy is usually due to extension of disease 
from the limgs, and is a feature of pneumonia, tuberculosis, 
bronchiectasis, bronchitis, pulmonary abscess, infarct, and 
neoplasm ; less commonly it is due to extension of inflammation 
from neighbouring structures, as in pericarditis, mediastinitis, 
Bubphrenic abscess, bronchial lymphadenitis, and Hodgkin’s 
disease ; it may be due to metastatic infection from tonsillitis 
or septicfiemia, and it is commonly associated with certain 
chronic diseases such as nephritis. 

Bacteriology , — Exudates accompanying acute pulmonary 
disease usually yield a growth of pneumococci or streptococci, 
but staphylococci, Priedlander’s baoUlus, and influenza bacilli 
are sometimes found. The imi)ortanoe of tuberculosis as a 
factor in the production of pleurisy has already been stressed 
{vide p. 130). 



666 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

Morbid Aruitomy . — The pleura is at first congested and 
loses its naturally smooth, shiny appearance ; next, an exudate 
of fibrin forms, varying in amount from a delicate film to a 
pasty coating J in. in thickness. If absorption and organisation 
takes place at this stage, permanent adhesions will be formed, 
but in many cases the dry fibrinous exudate is followed b}^ a 
serous efEusion. The fluid is at first clear, but may later 
become turbid from the presence of Ieucoo 3 rte 8 , or even 
purulent. A blood-stained effusion is usually associated with 
malignant growth, tuberculous disease, or pulmonary infarction. 

The fluid in inflammatory exudates has a high specific 
gravity, 1,016 or over; it is rich in protein and contains 
large numbers of cells. These are mainly polymorphonuclear 
leucocytes, except in tuberculous effusions, which show a 
predominance of this type of cell only in the early stage, being 
replaced later by l^jrmphocytes. Bacteria are usually found in 
films or cultures, except in the tuberculous cases, and in these 
the nature of the infection can usually be demonstrated bj 
culture or injection of the fluid into a guinea-pig. 

The fluid of a non-inflammatory transudate is sterile ; it is 
of a lower specific gravity, 1005-1015, contains less protein, 
3 per cent, or under, and there are few cells, which are chiefly 
lymphocytes and endothelial cells. 

A small effusion, persisting for only a few weeks, leads to 
little structural change in tlm chest apart from adhesion of 
the pleural surfaces after they have resumed contact. A large 
effusion, on the other hand, if allowed to remain over a long 
period, causes collapse of the underl 3 dng portions of the lung 
and so much thickening of its pleural covering that re-expansion 
may never take place. Fibroid changes then occur in the lung, 
and the chest wall falls in on the shrunken viscus. 

Polyserositis, or Pick’s disease, is a rare condition in which 
sero-fibrinous effusions occur in the pleura, pericardium, and 
peritoneum {vide p. 52s). 

Dry Pleurisy and Pleurisy with Effusion. — ^The symptoms, 
signs, and treatment of these conditions are outlined in the 
section on tuberculous pleurisy ; they are not materially 
different when caused by other infections, but are more apt 
to be overshadowed by disease in the lungs or other organs. 

Pleurisy, especially pleurisy with effusion, is almost always 
tuberculous when it occurs in young subjects. After middle 
age it is frequently due to bronchial or secondary growths, or 
it may be due to pulmonary embolism. 

Dry Plewriay . — ^The chief symptom of dry pleurisy is pain, 
the cl^acter of which depends on the site of the inflamed 



PLEURISY 


G57 


area. Apical pleurisy causes no more discomfort than a dull 
ache, whereas inflammation of the more mobile parts near 
the lower margin of the lungs, or on their diaphragmatic 
surfaces, is characterised by sharp, stabbing pain which may 
amount to agony. This pain is greatly accentuated by coughing 
or the taking of a deep breath. 

The characteristic physical sign is a friction rub, which is 
usually audible and sometimes perceptible as a tactile vibration 
on palpating the chest. Diaphragmatic pleurisy is not accom- 
panied by this sign, but causes pain referred to the neck or 
abdomen, and by its simulation of acute abdominal conditions 
sometimes leads to an unnecessary laparotomy. Friction 
sounds in the upper part of the chest are sometimes caused 
by movements of the scapulse, and should be excluded by 
altering the position of the patient’s shoulder. 

The pain of thoracic pleurisy is relieved by immobilising the 
affected side of the chest by strapping, and in diaphragmatic 
pleurisy a similar result is obtained by the application of a 
tight binder round the abdomen. Antiphlogistine, or other 
poultices, an electrically heated pad, or even artificial 
pneumothorax may be used. 

Plexiral Effusion . — The important signs of effusion are : 
diminished movement of the affected side of the chest ; 
displacement of the heart towards the sound side ; a flat 
percussion note over the lower part of the chest which reaches 
its highest point in the axilla ; absence of voice sounds and 
of tactile vocal fremitus over the dull area. It should be 
noted that if the underlying lung is consolidated or atelectatic 
bronchial breath sounds and segophony will be heard through 
the overlying fluid. 

With large effusions mediastinal displacement may give 
rise to dullness at the base of the sound lung near the spine. 

X-ray examination shows an opacity obliterating the costo- 
phrenic angle. With large effusions the heart is displaced, and 
the opacity apparently extends highest on the mediastinal and 
costal surfaces of the thorax, so that the upper edge of the 
effusion seems concave. 

Fluid may be loculated by adhesions in any part of the 
pleural cavity, perhaps the commonest site being between the 
lobes. When locidated collections lie adjacent to the chest 
wall localised dullness to percussion with absent breath soimds 
may be detected. Anteroposterior and lateral radiography will 
define the site of interlobar or other locahsed collections of fluid, 
and will also as a rule show the presence of the adhesions which 
have caused the loculation, and thereby will assist in diagnosis. 

42 



658 DISEASES OE THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

Treatment. — The treatment of tuberculone pleural effusion 
is discussed on page 133. In other cases therapy is for the 
most part that of the Tmderl3dng disorder. Thoracentesis 
which confirms the diagnosis, is needed for the full investigation 
of the nature of the disease, and a small quantity of the fluid 
should in general always be removed for this purpose, so 
that, for example, the cytology and bacteriology of the effusion 
may be established. As a rule the aspiration of large quantities 
of fluid are unnecessary. Exceptions occur when the effusion 
is so large that it causes respiratory and circulatory distress by 
its bulk, and when the effusion fails naturally to resolve. In 
the former instance, sufficient fluid should be removed to afford 
relief of symptoms, and after a day or so the aspiration may, 
if necessary, be repeated. The total volume removed at one 
aspiration should not exceed 1 pint, since with larger quantities 
the risk of causing left ventricular failure with pulmonarj" 
oedema is significant. Radiological examination of the under- 
lying lung is facilitated by thoracentesis, with or without air 
replacement. In non-tuberculous effusions air replacement is 
otherwise rarely justified. 

Failure of an effusion to absorb, after say six weeks or 
more, is an indication for aspiration. The intravenous adminis- 
tration of calcium gluconate sometimes promotes more rapid 
reabsorption, while breathing exercises are in some cases 
justified, and assist in the re-eximnsion of the underlying lung. 

Convalescence of a restful nature is essential, and should 
rarely be less than three months in duration. 


CHEST WOUNDS 

When a chest injury is sustained, shock, haemorrhage, and 
later infection may any or all develop and imperil the patient’s 
life. Since these sequelae are common to all wounds, their 
clinical features and therapy will not be elaborated here except 
in so far as they are modified by the special localisation of the 
lesion. It must be emphasised, however, that the early recog- 
nition, assessment, and treatment of these conditions are vital. 
In particular, the commensurate use of resuscitative measures 
such as the transfusion of blood, serum, or plasma, and oxygen 
administration, together with the employment of chemotherapy 
with anti-tetanus and anti-gas-gangrene sera as prophylactic 
measures against infection, are all procedures of the first 
importance. 

Chest woimds have special characteristics because the 



CHEST WOUNDS 


669 


thorax contains and is specially adapted to contain the lungs, 
the heart, and the great vessels. More or less severe impairment 
of respiratory and circulatory function may consequently follow 
this tyi)e of injury. Comprehensive yet simply applied tests of 
these functions have not yet been devised. Therefore, the 
assessment of a patient’s condition in these respects, upon 
which appropriate therapy must be based, is largely dependent 
upon the ability of the clinician to evaluate the aggregate 
significance of the symptoms displayed, together with the 
extent of the anatomical damage which physical signs, radio- 
logical appearances, and other tests may show. 

Injuries of the Thoracic Parietes..— The impact of missiles, 
and crush injuries, may result in isolated or multiple fractures 
of the ribs and sternum. Pain, cough, and dyspnoea commonly 
result, and the last in cases with extensive fractures may be 
fatal. It is dei)endent upon paradoxical respiration ; for, as 
the intrathoracic pressure falls with inspiration, the now mobile 
chest wall moves inwards freely, and the alveolar air passes 
from the underlying into the opposite hmg, while, on expiration 
the reverse process occurs, air passing back from the sound to 
the injured side. This paradoxical movement may be seen 
and felt, and is obvious at radioscopy, which will also reveal 
the coexistence of mediastinal oscillation. The author has 
found that severe cases of this type of dyspnoea are best treated 
by the use of a respirator such as the Nuffield modification of 
the Both machine now available in British hospitals. Pain 
should be controlled by free injection of percaine around the 
site of the fractures, and the patient should remain in the 
apparatus imtil, with trial, the chest wall is shown to have 
recovered its stability. In less severe cases strapping and 
oxygen administration may suffice. 

Hernia of the Lung. — A late consequence of fractures of 
the upper sternum or of the upper costal cartilages is hernia 
of the lung. The condition is painful, and the sweUing is 
apparent on coughing or straining. A plastic operation is 
usually necessary. 

Diaphragmatio Hernia. — Crush injuries and penetrating 
wounds may produce laceration of the diaphragm which permits 
hermation of the abdominal viscera into the thorax. The great 
size of the liver usually limits hernia development on the 
right side, though if stomach or intestine is extruded through 
a diaphragmatio rent here, obstruction of the bowel is even more 
likely to develop than is the case on the left side. Symptoms 
O'lid signs depend largely upon the size and contents of the 
hernia. The condition may only be discovered by chance at 



660 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

radiological examination or thoracotomy ; With a large hernia, 
however, the symptoms and many of the signs of a large 
coUection of air or fluid, or both, in the pleural cavity may 
appear. Mediastinal displacement may be gross, and commonly 
the symptoms and signs are much worse in the supine posture. 
Borborygmi and a splash may be audible. RadiologicaUy it 
may seem probable that abdominal viscera are within the thorax, 
for colonic haustrations or the partly filled stomach may be 
identified. The probability will be increased if the upper 
border of the lesion is convex, and the suprajacent lung dis- 
placed toward the apex. In pneumothorax the lung collapses 
toward its root. A barium meal will confirm the diagnosis. 
Therapy is surgical, and repair of the laceration should be 
undertaken before vomiting and other evidence of intestinal 
obstruction have developed. It is usually desirable to empty 
the stomach completely by means of a Ryle’s tube immediately 
before operation, and resuscitation may be u matter of urgency. 

Surgical Emphysema. — Surgical emphysema of the medias- 
tinum and chest wall may occur in association with pneumo- 
thorax, masiis other signs, and only occasionally causes pain 
and distress. Crepitation on palpation, hyperresonance, and 
crackling sounds on auscultation are diagnostic. Cough should 
be abolished with morphia, and reabsorption may be accelerated 
by continuous oxygen administration. 

Pleural Lesions 

Sacking Pneumothorax. — The diagnosis of this condition is 
obvious, for the lesion can be seen and beard. Paradoxical 
respiration occurs, and the abnormal lung movements can 
sometimes be seen through the wound in the chest wall. 
Immediate closure by pacing and surgical means is essential, 
after which radiological and other investigations can be 
undertaken as the condition of the patient improves. 

Tendon Pneumothorax. — ^This lesion is not common, but 
may arise from penetrating or non-penetrating wounds. The 
clinical and radiological evidence of its presence has been 
discussed {vide p. 653). A pneumothorax needle should be 
inserted, with aseptic precautions, through the chest wall 
3 in. from the mid-line in the second interspace, and sufiicient 
air withdrawn by a pneumothorax apparatus to give sympto- 
matic relief. If after coughing a rise in the recoMed pressure 
then takes place, the needle should be connected by means of 
a long tube passing beneath the surface of water in a Winchester 
bottle, so that continuous drainage is insured tmtil the valvular 



CHEST WOUNDS 


661 


opening in the lung closes. In an emergency any wide-bore 
needle will suffice to reduce the pressure temporarily. If 
possible a rubber finger-stall with a small opening at its tip 
should then be tied securely over the butt, so that transport 
to hospital may safely take place. Coughing should be 
temporarily abolished with morphia. 

Traumatio Pneumothorax. — Like spontaneous pneumo- 
thorax, this lesion frequently requires no special therapy 
save rest in bed, while the patient is under clinical and 
radiological observation. Complications such as tension 
pneumothorax, haemorrhage, or infection can thus quickly 
be identified and treated, as may associated lesions. 

Hsemothorax. — Blood commonly enters the pleural cavity 
from the chest wall or lung following penetrating or non- 
penetrating injuries. Chest wall haemorrhage, often associated 
with fractured ribs, may need local surgical intervention. 
Even if haemorrhage stops, the bulk of the effusion is always 
augmented during the next day or so by exudate fix»m the 
pleura. The fluid rarely clots in situ. A large haemothorax 
produces symptoms of loss of blood together with dyspnoea 
and pain in the chest, and the physical and radiological signs 
are usually those of pleural effusion. The lesion gives rise to 
considerable pyrexia, so that the advent of infection can only 
be judged by bacteriological examination of a sample removed 
at thoracentesis. If the fluid is purple and has an offensive 
smell, infection may be presumed. In these cases preliminary 
closed (under water) drainage by intercostal catheter is usually 
deemed advisable, and therapy subsequently is that of an 
empyema. In the absence of infection, small imcompUcated 
hsemothoraces are best treated from the onset by repeated 
aspiration. The pleura should be kept as dry as possible, 
though the volume of blood removed at a thoracentesis should 
at first be small. Large hajmothoraces, and cases with under- 
lying lung wounds — ^particularly with retained foreign bodies 
which may subsequently need removal — should in general be 
air-replac^ completely from an early stage and the pleura 
kept empty of fluid. In this way pulmonary hscmorrhage may 
be controlled, as may the intrapleural pressure. In rare oases 
of clotted hsemothorax, thoracotomy with removal of the 
contents may be necessary. Since associated pulmonary 
atelectasis is common the diaphragm beneath the hsemothorax 
may be unexpectedly high — ^this should be remembered when 
aspirating or draining the lesion. 

Hsemopneumothorax is common when the lung or chest 
wall is lacerated, and should be treated on the above lines, 



662 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

It may, however, also develop as a result of gas gangrene 
though the visceral pleura is intact. Pressure symptoms are 
then added to the toxaemic effects of the infection. 

Prophylactic chemotherapy and immunotherapy are 
especially essential in all cases of haemothorax, and treatment 
may later be repeated if infection develops. Blood transfusion 
is often necessary, while oxygen therapy is of less importance. 
As soon as danger of further haemorrhage from the original 
lesion has passed, breathing exercises should be started and 
continued, so that the fullest possible respiratory fimction may 
be restored. 


Pulmonary Injuries 

Blast Lesions. — It seems probable that the impact upon 
the body of an explosion wave, whether conducted through 
air or water, is the causal factor. The lesions tend to occur 
at tissue-air interfaces, and are thus common in the lungs and 
intestines. In the lungs multiple small haemorrhages, usually 
more extensively present on the right side, occur, some inter- 
stitial, some alveolar, associated with emphysema. As a result 
of both these lesions, the pulmonary capillary bed is reduced 
in proportion to the severity of the lesion. Dyspnoea, cyanosis, 
cough, and pyrexia occur, as may haemoptysis. Occasionally 
bronchial obstruction firom clotted blood adds the complication 
of pulmonary atelectasis. The physical signs are usually in- 
significant, but may include an emphysematous appearance of 
the chest and scattered r&les. Radiologically multiple opacities, 
indistinguishable from broncho-pneumonia, are seen, and 
occasionally serial examination during the first three days will 
disclose an increase in the lesions. The lesions absorb relatively 
rapidly, and the chest may be radiologically normal in less 
than a week. Oxygen therapy is of outstanding value, while 
general anaesthesia and transfusions of any kind should, if 
possible, be avoided imtil after recovery has occurred. Every 
patient exposed to the hazard of blast, therefore, needs early 
and repeat^ radiological examination. 

Pulmonary Hmmatoma. — ^An isolated haematoma of the lung 
may follow a sufficiently severe blow on the chest wall, and 
bruising of the lung tissue in addition to laceration is commonly 
produced when high-velocity missiles penetrate the chest. A 
large hasmatoma has clinical consequences similar to those of 
an infarct of comparable size. Thus, pyrexia, cough, 
haemoptysis, pleuritic pain, dyspnoea, and sometimes jaundice 
may rei^t. The physical signs include superficial braising, 
diminished movement and air entry, and an impaired percussion 



CHEST WOUNDS 


663 


note. Only occasionally do the signs resemble those of con- 
solidation. Radiologically an irre^arly spherical opacity is 
often seen, and not uncommonly the edge of the lesion may be 
clearly defined. The size of the opacity may vary from a just 
perceptible shadow to one which involves a whole lung. 

A majority of haematomata slowly resolve, and during this 
time the patient should rest in bed and receive symptomatic 
treatment. Breathing exercises and oxygen therapy are of 
value, while occasionally secondary infection of the lesion will 
make drainage or other surgical measures necessary. 

Pulmonary Atelectasis. — Lobar and multilobular atelectasis 
of limg occur commonly in association with a variety of chest 
wounds, and arise as a result of bronchial or bronchiolar 
obstruction by, for example, blood, sputum, rupture, or kinking. 
The signs, symptoms, radiological appearances, treatment, and 
sequelae differ in no way from those described on page 623, save 
that rupture of a major bronchus will necessitate early removal 
of the involved area of lung. 

Pulmonary Pat Embolism. — Bony fractures, and wounds in- 
volving fatty tissues, may be followed by fat embolism. The 
onset of symptoms generally^ occurs some seventy-two hours 
after the injury. The symptoms include apprehension, in- 
creaising dyspnoea, pleuritic pain, tachycardia, cyanosis, pyrexia, 
and cough productive of sputum which may be frothy or 
blood-stained, and which contains extracellular fat. Physical 
signs commonly consist of diminished air entry and rales at the 
bases of the lungs, though occasionally areas of consolidation 
may be detected. Not infrequently the clinical picture is 
complicated by the consequences of multiple fat emboli in the 
brain and spinal cord, while petechise in the skin are also often 
present. Radiological signs in the chest are usually those of 
multiple areas of consolidation, predominantly basal in site, 
while the general haziness of pulmonary oedema obscuring 
the lower lung fields is also sometimes seen. Major therapeutic 
measures include the prophylactic avoidance of all unnecessary 
movement of fractured bones, and in established cases oxygen 
therapy, venesection, and the general measures for the treatment 
of pneumonia. 

Intrathoraoio Foreign Bodies. — Radiology, and the use of 
anteroposterior and lateral films, will as a rule identify and 
localise a radio-opaque foreign body with accuracy. Anatomical 
localisation, e.gr., within a certain lobe of the lung, is usually all 
that is essential unless the lung is adherent to the chest wall, 
when depth measurements may also be necessary. Radio- 
translucent foreign bodies may be found at thoracotomy when 



664 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

surgical toilet of the track of the wound is carried out. If the 
condition of the patient permits it is in general wise to remove 
a foreign body at the earliest possible moment, i.c., within 
six hours of the injury, for risk of infection and secondary 
hsemorrhage is thereby decreased. In practice this is not often 
possible and under these circumstances the intervening period 
is occupied in treating associated lesions, such as shock, hsemo* 
thorax, or wounds of the chest wall, in combating infection 
with chemotherapy and other measures, and in resuscitating 
and improving the general condition of the patient. The 
decision if and when to operate is determined by a multitude of 
factors, which apart from the condition of the patient include 
the size, site, and number of foreign bodies concerned. As a 
rule a thoracotomy is most urgent when there is evidence of 
continued intrathoracic haemorrhage, when a large foreign 
body is retained, in cases of abdomino -thoracic wounds, and 
in those cases for which temporary closure of a sucking 
pneumothorax has already been undertaken. The operation 
is rarely if ever necessary in cases of clean stab or perforating 
woimds, and foreign bodies smaller in size than the little finger- 
nail may usually be left alone with safety. Until shock, heemor- 
I liage, or blast lesions of the lung have been adequately relieved 
operative intervention should be postponed, while similarly 
priority in treatment is usually required for haemothorax. 
8urgicitl textbooks should be consulted for further details. 

CaRDIO -VASCULAR WoUNDS 

Pericardium. — Quite small quantities of blood in the peri- 
cardium give rise to pericarditis ; a large hasmopericardium, 
if the wound provides inadequate drainage, may accumulate 
rapidly and progressively diminish the ability of the heart to 
fill in diastole, and therefore cause an increasing distension of 
systemic veins and a fall in the cardiac output. Clinical 
evidence of the latter will be found in increased dyspnoea, 
tachycardia, and a fall in the arterial blood pressure. Local 
physical and radiological signs of fluid, or fluid and air in the 
pericardium, may be present. Perhaps a majority of these 
cases are best treated conservatively, particularly if pericardial 
drainage is adequate to prevent the development of a large 
hmmopericardium. Control of the latter should be attempted 
by aspiration. When possible a pneumothorax induction needle 
should be used and sufficient blood aspirated to give sympto- 
matic relief. The pressure within the pericardium should then 
be recorded and the cannula left in position^ so that if in the 



CHEST WOUNDS 


666 


next few hours the pressure again rises aspiration may be 
repeated. If the lesion is not controlled in this way surgical 
drainage should be undertaken, at which operation it may be 
possible not only to repair the cardiac wounds but also to remove 
adjacent or impacted foreign bodies. 

The pericardium may become infected directly, or by 
spread fipom nearby infected lesions. A pyogenic pericarditis 
results, and will usually require surgical damage and chemo- 
therapy. The presence of other lesions, such as pulmonary 
hsematoma, or hsemopneumothorax, by masking physical and 
radiological signs frequently makes diagnosis difficult. 

Betained Foreign Bodies. — few cases survive and reach 
hospital with foreign bodies in the heart muscle or within the 
organ. Accurate locahsation of the foreign body is often 
possible radiologically, and after adequate resuscitation, if the 
foreign body be large or sharply pointed surgical removal 
with drainage of the pericardium should be attempted. When 
the foreign body is within the left ventricle or auricle it may be 
preferable to await its ejection and then remove it frY>m a 
peripheral artery. 

A foreign body adjacent to the heart may cause delirium cordis 
and gross circulatory collapse without infficting anatomical 
damage to the heart. Such a comphcation constitutes an added 
reason for the early removal of the foreign body. Circulator}' 
failure also accompanies many cases in which marked mediastinal 
oscillation occurs (e.g., in massive collapse or pneumothorax). 

Cardiac Contusion. — Occasionally the heart is crushed 
between the sternum and vertebral bodies, and in young subjects 
this may occur without fracture of the ribs or sternum. In a 
severe case the clinical course is that of coronary thrombosis, and 
since almost invariably the posterior surface of the heart is most 
damaged, an electro-cardiogram will show changes associated with 
thrombosis of the right coronary artery . Oxygen therapy, vene - 
section, and the treatment of cardiac infarction is required. 

Wounds ol the Great Vessels. — Rarely early operation may 
be successful in treating woimds of the great vessels. In other 
surviving oases aneurysm formation, ineluding arteriovenous 
aneurysm, may result. 

The early removal of foreign bodies adjacent to great vessels 
may prevent such a consequence, but once aneurysm formation 
has occurred therapy is largely palliative. In some cases of 
arteriovenous aneurysm, and occasionally in the more peri- 
pheral intrathoracic oases of simple aneurysm, surgical therapy 
may be curative, and should be undertaken at a relatively 
early stage. W. D. W. Brooks. 



666 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 


EMPYEMA 

Empyema is a oolleotion of pus in the pleural oavity. 

iEtiology. — Empyema is usually secondary to pulmonary 
disease, particularly lobar pneumonia, and less often broncho- 
pneumonia, abscess, or tuberculosis. Other causes are intra- 
thoracic neoplasm, subphrenic abscess, hver abscess, leakage 
from a cancerous oesophagus, and penetrating wounds of the 
chest. The infecting organism is in most oases either a 
streptococcus or a pneumococcus, but the influenza bacillus, 
staphylococcus, and actinomyoes are sometimes found. In 
tuberculous empyema the fluid is often sterile. 

Morbid Anatomy. — In the case of a pneumococcal empyema 
the fluid is usually thick and creamy, greenish yellow in colour, 
and contains thick flakes of fibrin. In streptococcal infections 
when fluid is first found it is thin, sUghtly turbid, and if 
allowed to settle in a test-tube is seen to consist of a clear 
portion with only a small deposit of pus. As the illness 
progresses the fluid becomes more turbid and the proportion 
of thick pus increases, until there is almost no clear super- 
natant fluid. It is of great importance to appreciate the 
significance of the characters of the fluid in all infections 
of the pleura, particularly streptococcal. No fluid should be 
regarded as pus, unless after sedimentation in a tube there 
is at least 90 per cent, of deposit. The earlier fluids are 
merely purulent effusions ; at this stage the condition is best 
called a pyothorax because there is as yet no attempt to 
localise the collection by pleural adhesions to one part of 
the chest. By the time that the fluid has thickened to 
become real pus, adhesions have formed and one is now 
dealing with a “ localised collection of pus ” ; this definition, 
and this only, should be permitted in the conception of an 
empyema. In neglected oases, or in those which have become 
chronic, a thick layer of fibrous tissue is formed over the 
pmietal and visceral pleura ; this may become a serious factor 
in preventing re-expansion of the lung and in perpetuating the 
abscess cavity. 

An empyema may rupture into a bronchus and be coughed 
up ; this may lead to spontaneous cure, but usually such 
drainage is inadequate. Very rarely it will point externally, 
giving the so-called “empyema necessitatis.” Delayed or 
inadequate drainage leads to aepticasmia or to amyloid disease ; 
there is also a danger of cerebral abscess. 

Symirtoms and Signs- — ^The symptoms are varied and may 



EMPYEMA 


667 


often be insidious in onset. The simplest clinical picture is 
that ^presented by the pneumococcal form, when the tem- 
perature either fails to return to normal, or when it rises 
again after the crisis, and assumes the remittent type ; the 
patient, instead of improving, begins to show signs of a severe 
toxsemia ; there are pallor, hectic flush, sweating at night, loss 
of appetite and wasting. Often, especially in streptococcal 
cases, the presence of an empyema may be entirely over- 
looked owing to the severe general illness and absence of any 
S3miptoms pointing to such a collection. Many tragedies occur 
through a misdiagnosis of “unresolved’’ pneumonia; it is 
essential to bear in mind the possibility of an empyema, for only 
too often a bitter disclosure occurs in the post-mortem room. 

The physical signs are the usual ones of pleural effusion, 
although it is sometimes possible to hear loud tubidar breathing 
through the fluid, more especially in children. QEdema of the 
chest wall may be detected by pinching up a roll of skin and 
comparing with that of the opposite side. Localised tenderness 
on pressure may be present just as in the case of an abscess 
elsewhere. High leucocytosis with a relative increase in the 
polymorphonuclears is valuable confirmatory evidence. An 
X-ray of the chest is of great value even if taken in bed when 
the patient is too ill to be moved. There should be no hesitation 
in the repeated use of an exploring needle m doubtful cases. 

Frognosis. — ^The condition is always serious, although less 
so in pneumococcal than in streptococcal infection. Below 
the age of five it carries with it a very high mortality, 
especially in infeints below one year ; in these, however, the 
empyema is usually only a contributory factor occurring in 
an illness associate with septicasmia, extensive pneumonia, 
pericarditis, meningitis, or middle-ear disease. In empyemata 
associated with pneumonia the mortality is much higher in the 
oases in which the empyema develops before the pneumonia 
has resolved ; i.e., syn-pneumonio empyema bears a worse 
prognosis than meta-pneumonio empyema. 

Treatment. — ^The treatment has been much confused by 
attempts to introduce complicated methods and by the 
ignor^ of certain fundament principles. The first essenticd 
is estimation of the correct time at which to operate. In the 
post-pneumonic cases by the time the fluid is detected it is 
usually thick pus in a weU-walled-off abscess cavity, and 
should be treats like any other abscess by immediate drainage. 
The danger lies in those cases where fluid is found early during 
the pneumonic stage. It has been shown that the size of an 
opening which can be tolerated in the chest is dependent upon 



668 DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

the vital oapaeity. In the stage of acute pneumonia the vital 
oapaoity may be so low as almost to equal the tidal air, and the 
smallest of holes made into the pleura may result in asphyxiation. 

If, therefore, the turbid fluid of an early pyothorax is 
mistaken for the pus of an empyema and open drainage 
instituted, death will follow rapidly. Aspiration must be 
practised until the fluid has thickened to form real pus, by 
which time the pneumonic process has usually subsided, the 
fluid is limited by adhesions, and it is safe to resect a rib. 
In a small percentage of oases recovery follows aspiration alone. 

Drainage by means of an intercostal catheter is often of 
great value in an ill patient. It should, however, be replaced 
at the earliest safe moment by a rib resection, which gives 
better drainage. 

In all empyemata the ultimate object is to obliterate 
completely the abscess cavity. This is brought about by re- 
expansion of the compressed lung which proceeds tmchecked 
providing adequate drainage is maintained and breathing and 
remedial exercises are begun early and persisted in earnestly. 
The value of proper breathing exercises cannot be too strongly 
stressed and their effective use should prevent any falling in 
of the chest wall or displacement of the mediastinum or 
diaphragm which would result in permanent deformity and 
impaired respiratory eflBciency. 

Arrest of the natural process of obliteration of the empyema 
cavity results in a chronic empyema ; this is most often due to 
too early removal of the tube or to the use of a wrongly placed 
or too small tube ; in others chronicity is due to disease of the 
underlying lung. Many of these cases are cured by establishing 
good drainage and giving breathing exercises, but in some a 
thoracoplasty may be required. 

Hydroihorax. — This is a passive non-inflammatory transu- 
date of clear fluid into the pleural cavity, and is usually a 
featiue of general dropsy, due to disease of the heart or 
kidneys. The hydrothorax may be unilateral, in which case 
it is usually on the right sidis, but in renal disease it is 
usually bilateral. Obstruction of veins and lymphatics by 
lymphadenoma may produce hydrothorax. 

Hsemothoraz. — This is a collection of blood in the pleural 
cavity. Spontaneous hsemothorax is usually due to bursting 
of an aortic aneurysm into the left pleural cavity, an event 
which is rapidly &tal. Traumatic hsemothorax is most often 
due to injury of an intercostal artery by a penetrating wound. 
The blood may remain fluid or may form a solid clot ; in most 
it is partly fluid and partly coagulated. Early aspiration with 



DISEASES OF THE MEDIASTINUM 


669 


air replacement shoiQd be attempted if the size of the haemo- 
thorax causes distress. Often operation may be needed to 
control a bleeding-point or for evacuation of a large collection 
which cannot be aspirated and which if left to organise would 
give rise to a long iUness and later deformity and permanent 
disability. Infection may occur from an associated lung 
injury and drainage would then be required as for an empyema. 
A spontaneous hasmothorax may maak an underlying neoplasm 
of the lung, or sometimes a tuberculous focus. 

Chylothorax. — This term is applied to eflhisions of milky 
fluid into the pleural cavity. There are two forms of this 
rare condition : in true chylothorax the fluid contains fat 
droplets and escapes from the thoracic duct or its tributaries 
as a result of rupture or obstruction ; in chyliform effusion 
the fluid contains pus and endothelial cells undergoing fatty 
degeneration, and is usually due to chronic tuberculous disease. 

Pneumothorax, Hydro-pneumothorax, Pyo-pneumothorax. — 
These are usually due to tuberculous disease of the lung, and 
are described elsewhere ; occasionally, however, they result 
from leakage of air into the pleural cavity through an aspirating 
needle or a penetrating wound. Rarer causes are rupture of 
an emphysematous buUa on the surface of the lung, leakage 
through a fistulous opening in the oesophagus, and formation 
of gas by anaerobic organisms infecting the pleura. 

The treatment is similar to that described in the section 
on Tuberculous Disease of the Pleura (vide p. 133), except that 
when pyogenic organisms are present surgical drainage is 
necessary. A closed system of drainage is preferable, combined 
with irrigation of the cavity if a bronchial fistula is not present. 
As thoracoplasty is usually needed to cure a tuberculous 
pyothorax, the drainage tube should not be inserted where 
it would interfere with the incision for this later operation. 
The best place is at the back as low as the tenth or eleventh 
rib ; failing this it should be well forward and low down in 
the axiUa. The re-expansion of the lung can be aided by 
the addition of a controlled negative pressure applied to the 
closed system of drainage. Tuberculous pyothorax carries 
with it a high mortality. R. C. Brock. 


DISEASES OF THE MEDIASTINUM 

Mediastinitis. — ^Acute pyogenic mediastinitis occurs as the 
result of the spread of infection from the neck, oesophagus, or 
trachea, and follows, for example, ulceration due to impacted 



670 DISEASES OP THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 

foreign bodies or to neoplasms. It may also oomplioate 
empyema, pericarditis, wounds of the chest, and pysemia. 

Substemal pain, cough, fever, and dyspnoea are outstanding 
symptoms. 

In many eases chemotherapy is worthy of a trial, while 
staphylococcal antitoxin should also be used in cases due to 
that organism. Therapy is otherwise surgical, and the 
prognosis is in any case serious. 

Syphilitic Mediastinitis. — This is an increasingly raure disease 
in which the clinical and radiological appearances may simulate 
mediastinal neoplasm or aortic aneurysm. The patient com- 
plains of cough and increasing dyspnoea. Gummatous ulceration 
of the sternum and anterior chest wall may have occurred, and 
thus persistent sinuses may be present. The gummatous mass 
in the mediastinum, as a rule, obstructs the superior vena cava, 
causing cyanosis and venous congestion in the head, neck, and 
arms. The Wassermann reaction is positive, and therapy 
should at first consist of large doses of potassium iodide, after 
a prolonged course of which other antis 3 n[>hilitio treatment may 
be instituted. 

Tuberculous Mediastinal Lymphadenitis. — Vide p. 111. 

Mediastinal Neoplasms. — Fluorography will disclose a growth 
in the mediastinum before anatomical and functional derange- 
ment of adjacent organs occurs, and long before physical 
signs and symptoms are apparent. Surgical therapy in many 
cases is thereby made simpler, more effective, and far less 
dangerous. Mediastinal neoplasms as a class give rise to 
symptoms and signs which are for the most part dependent 
upon pressure on neighbouring structures. 

The superior vena cava, or one of its main tributaries, may 
be obstructed with the production of venous congestion, 
cyanosis, and oedema in the area concerned. Dilated and 
tortuous veins are visible on the front of the chest and on the 
abdominal waU. Through these blood passes downwards and 
ultimately reaches the inferior vena cava. Arterial obstruction 
may cause unequal radial pulses, unilateral clubbing of the 
fingers, and sometimes thrombosis with gangrene. 

Dysphagia results from oesophageal o^truction, and chylous 
effusion from involvement of the ^oracic duct. Pleurisy with 
or without effusion occasionally arises. Paralysis foUowing a 
phase of irritation of the recurrent laryngeal, the vagus, the 
sympathetic, the phrenic, or intercostal nerves may occur. 

Pressure on the trachea gives rise to a diaraoteristio 
“ brassy ” cough, and later to dyspnoea and stridor, while 
bronchial obstruction from similar causes provokes somewhat 



DISEASES OF THE MEDIASTINUM 671 

similax symptoms, and in addition may result in atelectasis 
and secondary suppurative changes in the area of lung 
affected. 

Finally, pressure on bones causes erosion, a constant boring 
pain, and in the case of the spine ultimately gives rise to 
paraplegia. Radiological examination, including screening, a 
barium swallow, and bronchography is of great value in 
diagnosis. Neoplasms causing these symptoms and signs may 
be primary or secondary. 

Sarcoma and more commonly carcinoma in various primary 
sites may have mediastinal metastases. It is unusual in cases 
dying of bronchial carcinoma to find the tracheobronchial or 
paratracheal mediastinal glands free of neoplastic change. 

Innocent primary tumours include retrosternal goitre, 
thymoma, chondroma, lipoma, endothelioma, neurofibroma, 
and teratoma. Of these, the last two are, as a rule, situated 
respectively in the posterior and anterior mediastinum, and, 
while the thymoma overlies the root of the heart, the retro- 
sternal goitre tends to occupy the sui)erior mediastinum in 
the thoracic outlet. Any of these tumours may undergo 
malignant changes. Treatment is surgical. 

Aneurysm of the aorta is not uncommon, and is perhaps 
the best known of the mediastinal tumours {vide p. 586). It 
is worth remembering that the rare isolated congenital dextro- 
position of the aorta regularly produces dysphagia with the 
advent of arteriosclerotic change within its walls. (Esophageal 
pouches and dilatation of the oesophagus, such as that pro- 
duced by achalasia of the oardia, may give rise to bizarre 
symptoms and signs referable to other m^astinal structures, 
while oesophageal neoplasms occasionally are productive of 
clinical changes of the type recorded above. 

Finally, lymphoma {Hodgkin’s disease and lymphosarcoma) 
constitutes a common mediastinal tumour, and very frequently 
appears to originate in the mediastinal glands {vide p. 375). 

W. D. W. Bbooks. 



RENAL DISEASES 

RENAL FUNCTION 

M igration of primitive forms of life from their original 
habitat — the sea — to the less stable conditions of fresh 
water and land, demanded the elaboration of more 
complex mechanisms whereby the constancy of the internal 
medium could be maintained independently of changes in the 
external environment. In particular it was necessary to guard 
against undue loss, or accumulation, of water and s^t. These 
duties were largely taken over by the kidneys, or other excretory 
organs, in addition to their primordial function of eliminating 
waste products. Although elimination is the more obvious 
function of the kidneys, conservation (t.c., by reabsorption and 
sometimes selective secretion) is equally important. By means 
of these two processes — elimination and conservation — the 
kidneys assist the lungs, skin, and bowel in regulating the 
reaction and osmotic equilibrium of the blood and tissues. 
As part of this regulatory function the kidneys also elaborate 
ammonia and hippuric acid and are oonoemed in the break* 
down of the more complex ketones. 

The vast majority of substances normally eliminated in 
the urine are brought to the kidney already formed in the blood. 
Transference from blood to urine alters their relative concen- 
trations but does not change them chemically. Concentration, 
then, is an essential, and perhaps the most important, feature 
of excretion by the kidney. For all practical purposes, normal 
renal function means ability to concentrate to a normal degree, 
and failure to do so constitutes impairmeM of renal function. 
Concentrating ability is directly proportional to the number of 
functioning renal units or nephrons (i.e., a glomerulus with its 
corresponding tubule), of which there are slightly less than 
one million in each human kidney. Usually only some 20 per 
cent, of the nephrons are simultaneously active, but under 
conditions of stress all are engaged. There is, therefore, an 
enormous renal reserve. Not until lietween two-thirds and 


«72 



RENAL FUNCTION 678 

three-quarters of the total number of nephrons (total renal 
substance) is rendered inactive does loss of concentrating ability 
become manifest. Disease of the kidneys may therefore be quite 
extensive before diminution of renal function is apparent. 

Renal disease and impairment of renal function are there- 
fore not synonymous. Impairment of renal function frequently 
occurs in a “ functional ” sense ; it is not necessarily associated 
with structural changes in the kidneys as, for example, when 
mechanical obstruction to the flow' of urine, with increasing 
back-pressure, gives rise to impairment of renal function, which 
may return to normal when the obstruction is removed. Renal 
function, indeed, fluctuates in a surprising manner in response 
to a large variety of external stimuli without the ordinary signs 
of renal diseases being present. 

Characteristic of the normal kidney is its ability to adapt 
itself to changing conditions. Present^ with a large quantity 
of fluid for elimination, it responds by excreting a large 
volume of dilute urine ; if the fluid intake be restricted, or 
an excess of water be lost from the body by sweating, vomit- 
ing, or diarrhoea, a small volume of highly concentrated urine 
is excreted. Impairment of renal function may therefore be 
revealed either by inability to concentrate, or to dilute, according 
to circumstances. Inability to concentrate is usually evident 
earlier ; but, with increasing impairment of function, diluting 
power is inevitably affected, so that eventually it becomes 
impossible to form either a very dilute or a very concentrated 
urine. Finally, all elasticity of response is lost, and if any 
urine at all is excreted it attains a fixed specific gravity of 
about 1010 (more strictly 1010). Fixity of the specific gravity 
of the urine at 1010 {isoihenuria) is a certain sign of extreme 
impairment of renal function. It may be noted that 1010 is 
approximately the specific gravity of the blood serum after 
removal of the serum proteins. 

Deficient concentration in the urine eventually leads to 
accumulation of urinary constituents in the blood, and diminu- 
tion of renal function may be revealed in this way also. Such 
a condition is referred to as renal insvffiriencyy vrincemkiy or, 
more commonly, uroemia. Renal function may l>e severely 
impaired, however, without undue accumulation of urinary con- 
stituents in the blood when certain “compensatory” mechanisms 
are brought into play. The most important of these is 
polyuria. Deficient concentration is for a time compensated 
for by increased volume ; so that, in a given period, the total 
quantity of wa^ste-produots eliminated is sufficient to prevent 
accumulation. This is known as compensaied impairment 

43 



HENAL DISEASES 


6^4 

o| t«mI futtclion (Fishberg). Eventually, with progressive loss 
of function, a stf^ is reached in which a sufficient volume of 
urine cannot be elaborated, compensation fails, accumutotion 
occurs in the blood, and a condition of decompensated tmpamneni 
of renal function^ i.6., renal insufficiency ^ supervenes. Renal 
disease, therefore, may or may not be accompanied by, or 
progress to, impairment of renal function, i'be latter 

may not be so severe as to lead to renal insufficiency. 

Impairment of renal function affects simultaneously the 
maximum concentration in the urine in which all the substances 
normally eliminated can be excreted, though not to the same 
degree. Even substances which are not normally foimd in the 
urine, such as albumen, sugar, and the ketone bodies, are, in 
the presence of severe impairment of renal function, excreted 
in diminished concentration. A reduction in the concentration 
of albumen in the urine is therefore not always a sign of 
improvement. Ability to excrete water may also be impaired, 
as shown by a deficient water excretion test {vide p. 678). 
The extent to which the various substances are diminished in 
concentration in the urine when renal function becomes 
impaired is roughly proportional to the degree in which they 
are normally concentrated by the kidneys. This explains 
why some substances ckccumulate in the blood in renal 
insuflBciency, whilst others apparently do not. Creatinin and 
urea, for example, which are normally concentrated some 80 
and 60 times respectively in their passage through the kidneys, 
readily accumulate in the blood when renal function becomes 
impaired. Uric acid also accumulates in such circumstances, 
though not so readily, being normally only concentrated some 
30 times by the kidneys. Chloride, calcium, sodium, and water, 
on the other hand, which are normally scarcely concentrated 
at all by the kidneys (i.e., their concentration in blood and 
urine is practically identical), do not accumulate in the blood 
in renal insufficiency. Phosphate, sulphate, and potassium, 
occupy an intermediate position in this respect. The hall-mark, 
then, of impairment of renal function is diminution of con- 
centrating power, whilst that of renal insufficiency is retention 
in the blo^. The latter, like the analogous cardiac insufficiency, 
is a relative term, when, for example, there is nitrogenous 
retention on a diet containing a normal amount of protein, 
but not when the protein intake is limited. Impairment of 
renal function is present all the time, but renal insufficiency 
only under conditions of greater stress ; or, to put it another 
way, a decompensated impairment of renal function has become 
compensated, in this instance, by diminishing the protein intake. 



RENAL FUNCTION 675 

The decompensation of a previously compensated impair- 
ment of renal function is one of the most important events in 
renal disease, and may be brought about in a variety of ways. 
Thus, since polyuria is by far the most important factor in 
maintaining compensation, anything which diminishes the 
volume of urine may lead to decompensation. Urinary volume 
may be diminished for many reasons, some renal and others 
extra-renal in origin. The only strictly renal cause of diminished 
urinary volume (oliguria, or anuria) is a degree of impairment 
of renal function so severe that the kidney is unable to eliminate 
a sufficient quantity of water. This is a comparatively rare 
event. Far more often compensation is broken by extra-renal 
causes in which water is diverted from the kidneys into the 
tissues {pre-renal deviation) y where it becomes “ bound and 
is consequently not available for excretion. Extra-renal 
oliguria is seen, for example, in myocardial failure, excessive 
vomiting or diarrhoea, the rapid formation of general oedema 
and intercurrent febrile disorders. In general, decompensation 
may be brought about by [a) diminished concentration, (b) 
diminished volume, and (r) increased katabolism. 

Because urea accumulates most readily in the blood, and 
its estimation therein is comparatively easy, the blood urea 
is generally used as an index of renal efficiency. In clinical 
medicine it is also regarded as indicative of the nitrogen content 
of the blood and therefore of the degree of azotamiia. At first 
it was believed that, except from increased protein katabolism, 
the blood urea was only increased when renal function was 
unpaired. Later, it was found that azotaemia frequently occurs 
in a large variety of disorders in which there was no reason to 
suspect damage to the kidneys and in which ability to con- 
centrate seemed to be normal. This apparent paradox, referred 
to in previous editions of this book as extra-renal, or pre-renal, 
azotaemia, was believed to be due to a decrease of urinary 
volume so pronounced that, despite normal concentration, the 
output of nitrogen lagged, and accumulation in the blood 
resulted. Recent and more delicate tests of renal function 
{vide Inulin and Diodrast Clearances, p. 683) show, however, 
that in these cases renal function is, in fact, impaired. ‘‘ Extra- 
renal azotaemia, therefore, differs in degree, but not in kind, 
from that associated with more obviously diminished renal 
[unction. Apart from excessive endogenous protein kata- 
bolism it would seem that azotaemia is generally, if not 
dways, due to impairment of renal function though it is 
lot necessarily accompanied by structural changes in the 
ddneys {vide p. 693). 



RENAL DISEASES 

RENAL FUNCTION 

M igration of primitive forms of life from their original 
habitat — the sea — to the less stable conditions of fresh 
water and land, demanded the elaboration of more 
complex mechanisms whereby the constancy of the internal 
medium could be mtuntained independently of changes in the 
external environment. In particular it was necessary to guard 
against undue loss, or accumulation, of water and s^t. These 
duties were largely taken over by the kidneys, or other excretory 
organs, in addition to their primordial function of eliminating 
waste products. Although elimination is the more obvious 
function of the kidneys, conservation (t.e., by-reabsorption and 
sometimes selective secretion) is equally important. By means 
of these two processes — elimination and conservation — the 
kidneys assist the lungs, skin, and bowel in regulating the 
reaction and osmotic equilibrium of the blood and tissues. 
As part of this regulatory function the kidneys also elaborate 
ammonia and hippuric acid and are concerned in the break- 
down of the more complex ketones. 

The vast majority of substances normally eliminated in 
the urine are brought to the kidney already formed in the blood. 
Transference from blood to urine alters their relative concen- 
trations but does not change them chemically. Concentration, 
then, is an essential, and perhaps the most important, feature 
of excretion by the kidney. For all practical purposes, normal 
renal function means ability to concentrate to a normal degree, 
and failure to do so constitutes impairmeTU of renal function. 
Concentrating ability is directly proportional to the number of 
functioning renal units or nephrons (t.e., a glomerulus with its 
corresponding tubule), of which there are slightly less than 
one million in each human kidney. Usually oi^y some 20 per 
cent, of the nephrons are simultaneously active, but under 
conditions of stress all are engaged. There is, therefore, an 
enormous renal reserve. Not until l>etween two-thinls and 



REKAL FUNCTION 673 

three-quarters of the total number of nephrons (total renal 
substance) is rendered inactive does loss of concentrating ability 
become manifest. Disease of the kidneys may therefore be quite 
extensive before diminution of renal function is apparent. 

Renal disease and impairment of renal function are there- 
fore not sjmonymous. Impairment of renal function jfrequently 
occurs in a “ functional ” sense ; it is not necessarily associated 
with structural changes in the kidneys as, for example, when 
mechanical obstruction to the flow of urine, with increasing 
back-pressure, gives rise to impairment of renal function, which 
may return to normal when the obstruction is removed. Renal 
function, indeed, fluctuates in a surprising manner in response 
to a large variety of external stimuli without the ordinary signs 
of renal diseases being present. 

Characteristic of the normal kidney is its ability to €wiapt 
itself to changing conditions. Present^ with a large quantity 
of fluid for elimination, it resxx>nds by excreting a large 
volume of dilute urine ; if the fluid intake be restricted, or 
an excess of water be lost from the body by sweating, vomit- 
ing, or diarrhoea, a small volume of higUy concentrated urine 
is excreted. Impairment of renal function may therefore be 
revealed either by inability to concentrate, or to dilute, according 
to circumstances. Inability to concentrate is usually evident 
earlier ; but, with increasing impairment of function, diluting 
power is inevitably affected, so that eventually it becomes 
impossible to form either a very dilute or a very concentrated 
urine. Finally, all elasticity of response is lost, and if any 
urine at all is excreted it attains a fixed specific gravity of 
about 1010 (more strictly 1010). Fixity of the specific gravity 
of the urine at 1010 {isothmuria) is a certain sign of extreme 
impairment of renal function. It may be noted that 1010 is 
approximately the specific gravity of the blood serum after 
removal of the serum proteins. 

Deficient concentration in the urine eventually leads to 
accumulation of urinary constituents in the blood, and diminu- 
tion of renal function may be revealed in this way also. Such 
a condition is referred to as ren/il uisiifficienct/y urinceinia, or, 
more commonly, urcemia. Renal function may be severely 
impaired, however, without undue accumulation of urinary con- 
stituents in the blood when certain “ compensatory” mechanisms 
are brought into play. The most important of these is 
polyuria. Deficient concentration is for a time compensated 
for by increased volume ; so that, in a given period, the total 
quantity of waste-products eliminated is sufficient to prevent 
accumulation. This is known as compensated impairment 

43 



6*^4 kSNAL 1>1SEA6BS 

^ TtJMll JutiCtion (Fishberg). Eventually, with progressive loss 
oi fvmction, a stage is reached in which a suflSoient volume of 
urine cannot be elaborated, compensation fails, aooumutetion 
occurs in the blood, and a condition of decompensated mpatrmetU 
of renal function, i.e., renal insufficiency, supervene. Renal 
disease, therefore, may or may not be accompanied by , or 
progress to, impairment of renal function, whilst the latter 
may not be so severe as to lead to renal insufficiency. 

Impairment of renal function affects simultaneously the 
maximum concentration in the urine in which all the substances 
normally eliminated can be excreted, though not to the same 
degree. Even substances which are not normally found in the 
urine, such as albumen, sugar, and the ketone bodies, are, in 
the presence of severe impairment of renal function, excreted 
in diminished concentration, A reduction in the concentration 
of albumen in the urine is therefore not always a sign of 
improvement. Ability to excrete water may also be impaired, 
as shown by a deficient water excretion test (vide p. 678). 
The extent to which the various substances are diminished in 
concentration in the urine when renal function becomes 
impaired is roughly proportional to the degree in which they 
are normally concentrated by the kidneys. This explains 
why some substances accumulate in the blood in renal 
insufficiency, whilst others apparently do not. Creatinin and 
urea, for example, which are normally concentrated some 80 
and 60 times respectively in their passage through the kidneys, 
readily accumulate in the blood when renal function becomes 
impaired. Uric acid also accumulates in such circumstances, 
though not so readily, being normally only concentrated some 
30 times by the kidneys. Chloride, calcium, sodium, and water, 
on the other hand, which are normally scarcely concentrated 
at all by the kidneys (t.c., thejr concentration in blood and 
urine is practically identical), do not euK^umulate in the blood 
in renal insufficiency. Phosphate, sulphate, and potassium, 
occupy an intermediate position in this respect. The hall-mark, 
then, of impairment of renal function is diminution of con- 
centrating power, whilst that of renal insufficiency is retention 
in the blood. The latter, like the analogous cardiac insufficiency, 
is a relative term, when, for example, there is nitrogenous 
retention on a diet containing a normal amount of protein, 
but not when the protein in^e is limited. Impairment of 
renal function is present all the time, but renal insufficiency 
only under conditions of greater stress ; or, to put it another 
way, a decompensated impairment of renal fhnotion has become 
compensated, in this instance, by diminishing the protein int^e. 



RENAL FUNCTION 675 

The deoompeDBation of a previously compensated impair- 
ment of renal function is one of the most important events in 
renal disease, and may be brought about in a variety of ways. 
Thus, since polyuria is by far the most important factor in 
maintaining compensation, anything which diminishes the 
volume of urine may lead to decompensation. Urinary volume 
may be diminished for many reasons, some renal and others 
extra-renal in origin. The only strictly renal cause of diminished 
urinary volume (oliguria, or anuria) is a degree of impairment 
of renal function so severe that the kidney is unable to eliminate 
a sufficient quantity of water. This is a comparatively rare 
event. Far more often compensation is broken by extra-renal 
causes in which water is diverted from the kidneys into the 
tissues {pre-renal deviation), where it becomes “ bound ” and 
is consequently not available for excretion. Extra-renal 
oliguria is seen, for example, in myocardial failure, excessive 
vomiting or diarrhoea, the rapid formation of general oedema 
and intercuirent febrile disorders. In general, decompensation 
may be brought about by (a) diminished concentration, (b) 
diminished volume, and (o) increased katabolism. 

Because urea accumulates most readily in the blood, and 
its estimation therein is comparatively easy, the blood urea 
is generally used as an index of renal efficiency. In clinical 
medicine it is also regarded as indicative of the nitrogen content 
of the blood and therefore of the degiee of azotcemia. At first 
it was believed that, except from increased protein katabolism, 
the blood urea was only increased when renal function was 
impaired. Later, it was found that azotaemia frequently occurs 
in a large variety of disorders in which there was no reason to 
suspect damage to the kidneys and in which ability to con- 
centrate seemed to be normal. This apparent paradox, referred 
to in previous editions of this book as extra-renal, or pre-renal, 
azotaemia, was believed to be due to a decrease of urinary 
volume so pronounced that, despite normal concentration, the 
outpiU of nitrogen lagged, and accumulation in the blood 
resulted. Recent and more delicate tests of renal function 
(vide Inulin and Diodraist Clearances, p. 683) show, however, 
that in these cases renal function is, in fact, impaired. “ Extra- 
renal azotaemia, therefore, differs in degree, but not in kind, 
from that associated with more obviously diminished renal 
function. Apajrt from excessive endogenous protein kata- 
bolism it would seem that azotjemia is generally, if not 
always, due to impairment of renal function though it is 
not necessarily accompamied by structural changes in the 
kidneys (vide p. 693). 



676 


RENAL DISEASES 


TESTS OF RENAL FUNCTION 

Until recently it has not been possible to assess separately 
the functional capacity of the two main components of the 
nephron — the filtering power of the glomerulus, and the re« 
absorbing (or secretory) ability of the renal tubule. Most 
methods of estimating renal function have therefore been 
based on the most conspicuous feature of renal activity, namely, 
ability to concentrate. The earliest tests, indeed, consist^ 
in noting the absence of odour in the urine in renal disease 
after the ingestion of such substances as asparagus and turpen- 
tine, and the delay in the appearance of the colour in the urine 
after the administration of certain dyes. In both instances it 
was the lack of concentration of such substances in the urine 
which suggested impairment of renal function. 

As, moreover, all the urinary constituents are more or less 
simultaneously affected when the concentrating power of the 
kidney is diminished, it foUows that any one, or all, of them 
may properly be used as an index of renal function. Practical 
considerations caused urea to be generally selected for this 
purpose, though there is no inherent reason for this. 

It is ob\dou8 that so far as the urine is concerned all the 
necessary information regarding concentrating ability can be 
obtained by a study of the specific gravity. Impairment of 
renal function, therefore, can be estimated easily and accurately 
by following the 8j>ecific gravity of the urine ; but for the 
diagnosis of renal insufficiency an examination of the blood 
is essential, and for general purposes an estimation of the urea 
content of the latter is the most convenient. It has been stated 
that the total non-protein nitrogen, the creatinin, and the 
uric acid contents of the blood give earlier evidence of the 
approach of renal insufficiency. It is doubtful whether such 
claims can be upheld, and certainly in practice the advantages 
are negligible. 

Great care is necessary in interpreting the results of any 
method of estimating renal function, ^vere renal disease 
fineqnently leads to serious disturbances in other systems and 
organs, and it is upon these that the ultimate prognosis often 
depends. It is therefore important to remember that, whilst 
renal function tests afford fairly accurate information as 
to the extent of the local lesion, if used as an index of the 
general prognosis they must be considered in relation to the 
whole clinical state. 

At one time or another almost all substances which are 



TESTS OP RENAL FXJNCTION 


677 


capable of excretion by the kidney, and which can be readily 
estimated in the blood and urine, have been used as an index 
of renal function. The number of renal function tests is therefore 
very large. It is only possible here to describe two of the 
most valuable in any detail — ^the Specific Gravity and the 
Urea Clearance Tests. To facilitate reference brief com- 
ments are added on some of the more important of the other 
tests, but for details of their application larger works should be 
consulted. 

Tests from a Study of the Urine. — ^It is assumed that the 
reader is familiar with the ordinary qualitative tests for blood 
and albumen as applied in the routine examination of the urine, 
and also with the common microscopical appearances of the 
urinary sediment. 

Appearance of the Urine , — Babylonian physicians of 4000 
B.c. were interested in the colour and perhaps composition of 
the urine. In the Middle Ages inspection of the urine was 
sometimes carried out by professional uroscopists. Later, 
the diagnosis was made by the physician, after inspection of 
the urine, but treatment was carried out by the apothecary 
(Kilduffe). Taken in conjunction with the clinical findings 
much information may be obtained from noting the appearance, 
and particularly the colour, of the urine. With normal renal 
function a small volume of urine will usually contain much 
pigment and have a high specific gravity. Absence of pigment 
with a small volume of urine and a low 8X)ecific gravity generally 
indicates severe impairment of renal function. The intensity 
of the pigmentation of two simultaneous specimens obtained 
by ureteric catheterisation will often give information as to 
the relative functional capacity of the two kidneys, even before 
chemical analysis has been carried out. In general, when 
much fluid is either lost from the body entirely, or diverted 
to the tissues in the form of oedema^ the urine is highly coloured, 
and of high specific gravity, if renal function is normal. On 
the other hand, if large quantities of fluid are being consumed, 
or oedema fluid and serous effusions are being absorbed, 'the 
urine may be colourless and of low specific gravity with quite 
normal renal function, but the volume will be large. 

Specific OravUy of the Urine,— A study of the specific gravity 
of the urine, inter^^peted with regard to the conditions obtaining 
at the time, will often supply all the information required 
oonoeming the functional capacity of the kidneys. To 
determine to what extent impairment of function has given 
rise to accumulation in the blood, direct analysis of the latter 
must be made. 



678 


RENAL DISEASES 


In general, the specific gravity of the urine varies inversely 
as the volume, the extreme range in health being from about 
1002 to 1040, with an average of J015 to 1020. The night urine 
is usually more concentrated than that passed during the day, 
and therefore, unless for special reasons, it is advisable to take 
the reading in a sample of the whole twenty -four hours’ output. 

Information of value may sometimes be obtained by a 
consideration of the specific gravity alone, even in a single and 
casual specimen ; for, if, in the absence of a large quantity of 
protein or sugar, it be high, i.e., 1026 or more, renal function 
is probably intact whatever the volume of urine excreted. 
With values lower than this no assessment of renal function 
can be made without a knowledge of the corresponding volume. 
The close inverse relationsliip which normally exists between 
urinary specific gravity and volume forms the basis of the 
Concentration and Dilution Tests. 

The Concentration (Specijic Gravity) Test . — After complete 
abstention from fluids for a period of not less than sixteen 
hours (beginning on the previous evening) the specific gravity 
of three consecutive hourly specimens of urine is estimated. 
If renal function is normal, then at least one of the readings 
will be 1022 to 1035, or even 1040, though values below 1025 
must be regarded with suspicion and the test should be repeated. 
The specific gravity of small volumes of urine may be estimated 
by the use of Specifiq Gravity Beads, but if less than 3 c.c. 
is available it is easier to estimate the concentration of urea, 
which imder these circumstances should be not less than 2 per 
cent. No correction is required for less than 4 parts per 
1,000 of protein. For 4 parts subtract 001, 8 parts 002, 12 
parts 003, and 16 parts 004 from the observed specific gravity 
reading. The concentration test should be performed before 
the dilution test w hen both are required. 

The Dilution (Specific Gravity) Test. — Water to the amount 
of 1,200 c.c. (or 42 oz.) is drunk in the course of half an hour, 
the patient being in bed. The bladder is emptied at hourly 
intervals for four consecutive hours after this, and the specific 
gravity of each specimen (which, for reasons explained later, 
are alro carefully measur^) is taken. If renal function is 
normal then at least one of the readings should be below 1010, 
and may even reach 1002. Values above 1008 should be 
regarded with suspicion. 

Water Excretion Test. — In four hours a normal subject, 
who has taken no food or drink for the preceding twelve hours, 
will eliminate approximately the whole of 1,200 c.c. of water 
taken in the course of half an hour, the larger part being excreted 



TESTS OF RENAL FUNCTION 679 

in the first two hours, and for this reason the hourly specimens 
of urine obtained in the course of carrying out the Dilution 
Test are accurately measured. If, owing to deficient renal 
function, water elimination is impaired, then probably less 
than 800 c.c. will be excreted in four hours. There are, however, 
many other causes of impaired water elimination, i.e., those of 
pre-renal deviation (p. 676). A poor water-excretion test, 
therefore, may be due to reasons other than diminished renal 
function. If, however, poor water excretion is associated with 
a normal concentration test, then impaired water excretion is of 
extra-renal origin. Per contra, if diminished water excretion 
is associated with a poor concentration test, the former may 
be due to either renal or extra-renal causes. 

The Urea Concentration Test (Maclean and de Wesselow). — 
After abstaining from fluid for twelve to eighteen hours the 
bladder is emptied completely. Fifteen grammes of urea in 
100 c.c. are then drunk and the bladder again emptied at hourly 
intervals for three hours. If renal function is normal the con- 
centration of urea should be not less than 2 per cent, in at least one 
of these specimens . If the volume of any hourly specimen exceeds 
150 c.c. it is of no value for the test and should be discarded. 
This test is of value only as a rough indication of renal function. 

Dye Tests, — These are mostly used in surgical practice. 
The dyes chiefly used are indigo-carmine and phenolsulphon- 
phthalein. 

Excretion Urography, — In addition to its value for outlining 
the renal tract under X-rays, this procedure {vide p. 731) will 
give information of the excretory power of the kidney. After 
the intravenous injection of an iodine-containing contrast 
medium a good shadow of the renal pelvis should be obtained 
in five minutes. Delay in the appearance of this shadow 
or its absence indicates defective renal excretion. 

Analysis oi the blood as an Index ot Renal Function. — 
Analysis of the blood provides evidence that urinary con- 
stituents are present therein in excess, but does not show 
whether such excess is due to renal or to extra-renal causes. 
Urea, the total non-protein nitrogen, creatinin, uric acid, and 
phosphate, are often estimated, but for all practical purposes 
the blood urea furnishes all the information required. 

The Blood Urea, — ^Normally the blood contains from 20 to 
40 mg. of urea per 100 c.c In the very young and in normal 
pregnancy 20 to 26 mg. per 100 c.c. may be regarded as the 
upper limits of the normal. In the aged up to 60 mg. per 
100 0 . 0 . may also be considered normal. The extent to which 
urea may accumulate in the blood in renal insufficiency depends 



680 RENAL DISEASES 

upon several factors, among which are — the severity and 
duration of tlie renal inadequacy, the efficiency of compensatory 
mechanisms, the fluid intake, the protein content of the food, 
the rate of protein katabolism, and the functional capacity 
of the liver which elaborates urea. Urea, being an easily 
diffusible non -electrolyte, is found in practically the same 
concentration in most of the tissues of the body and therefore 
may be estimated in either plasma, serum, or whole blood, 
cerebro-spinal fluid, and, with suitable precautions, in saliva. 
By appropriate measures (inde p. 692) a raised blood urea due 
to renal insufficiency may be reduced to normal, though the 
patient may die from “ uraemia.” 

Simultaneous Tests on Blood and Urine for the Estimation 
of Renal Function, — Ambard, as a result of simultaneous 
studies of the concentration of urea in the blood and urine, 
laid the foundations for most of the subsequent work on renal 
function tests. 

The Addis Ratio . — Addis found that when the kidney is 
working to its maximum capacity after being “ loaded ” with the 
administration of a large dose of urea and extra fluid, the ratio : — 

milligrams urea in one hour’s urine 
milligrams urea in 100 o.c. blood 

is proportional to the number of functioning nephrons. He 
showed that this ratio is really a measure of the volume of 
blood cleared of urea by the kidneys in one hour, and thus 
introduced the conception of the clearance ” tests. 

The Blood-urea Clearance Tests. — Moeller, McIntosh, and 
Van Slyke developed the conception of blood-urea clearance 
to include not only that amount of blood which was cleared 
of urea in a given time when the kidney was working to maximum 
capacity, but for conditions in which renal capacity was not 
fully taxed. According to these workers the kidney is always 
working to its maximum capacity when urine is excreted at 
the rate of about 2 c.c. per minute or more. Under such 
conditions the rate of urea excretion is directly proportional 
to the concentration of urea in the blood, and the volume of 
blood which is cleared of urea in one minute is termed by Van 
Slyke the maximum clearance. In health this is relatively 
constant at about 76 o.c. When the rate of urine excretion is 
less than 2 c.c. per minute, the amount of blood cleared per 
minute is not constant, but varies as the square root of the 
urinary volume. This is termed the Standard Clearance, and 
averages about 54 c.c. The maximum and standard clearances 
can therefore be derived from the two following formuhe 



TESTS OF RENAL FUNCTION 


681 


which are applied respectively according to whether the rate 
of urinary excretion is above or below 2 c.c. per minute : — 

Tjv 

Maximum Clearance or 

15 


Standard Clearance or C, 

15 

where U=urinary urea in milligrams per 100 c.c. 

B=blood urea in milligrams per 100 o.o. 

V= volume of urine in cubic centimetres per minute. 
The authors give the following normal values for adults : — 
Maximum Clearance range 64 to 99 c.c. mean 75 c.c. 
Standard Clearance range 40 to 68 c.c. mean 54 c.c. 

It is necessary to make a correction for surface area in the case 
of children and for adults of abnormal stature. 

For comparative purposes it is convenient to convert the 
results into percentages. This can be done by multipl 3 dng the 
maximum clearance and the standard clearance figures by 
1*33 and 1*85 respectively. The following are examples of the 
calculations for maximum and standard clearances : — 


BlAxnfXJM Clearance 


Blood urea 30 mg. per 100 c.c. 

Ist Hour 

Urine urea . 250 mg. per 100 c.c. 

Urine volume . 3-90 c.c. per minute. 


, ^260 x 3-9 


2nd Hour 


350 mg. per 100 c.c. 
2-82 c.c. per minute. 
^ 350x2-82 


Blood cleared of urea per minute » 32*5 c.c. 
Per cent, of normal=32-6x 1-33 — 43-2 
per cent. 


Blood cleared of urea per 
minute— 32-9 c.c. Per 
cent, of normal = 
32-9x1-33 = 43 8 per 
cent. 


Mean =43 -5 per cent, of normal. 


Standard Clearance 


Blood urea 40 mg. per 100 c.c. 


Urine urea 
Urine volume . 

C.- 


Hour 

1,150 mg. per 100 o.o. 
1 *52 c.c. per minute. 

1160 , 

-7^xV162. 


Blood cleared of urea per minute»35*4 o.o. 
Per cent, of normal 85 *4x1*86= 65-5 
per cent. 


2nd Hour 

1,300 mg. per 100 c.c. 

1 *06 c.c. per minute. 

c,=?^xvro6. 

Blood cleared of urea per 
minute =33 *5 0 . 0 . Per 
cent, of normal = 
33*5x1 *86 =61 *9 per 
cent. 



682 


RENAL DISEASES 


Expressed as a percentage of the normal, values below 76 
indicate renal deficiency. SjTnptoms of “ uraemia ” are said 
to appear with values below 5 per cent, but not above 10 
per cent. It is important to note that values below normal 
may be due not only to disease of the kidney itself but also to 
diminished renal blood-flow, e.g., heart failure. Repetition of 
the test in the same subject will often show considerable 
variations in the results. 

The test is carried out as follows. Between breakfast and 
lunch (tea but not coffee may be taken with breakfast) the 
bladder is emptied and the specimen is discarded. Exactly 
sixty minutes later (a stop-watch should be used) the bladder 
is again emptied, and the resulting specimen is cuxuratdy 
measured (in cubic centimetres and not in ounces) and its 
urea content determined. The bladder is again emptied exactly 
sixty minutes later and the specimen measured and its urea 
content determined as before. A sample of blood is taken for 
estimation of the blood urea at the end of the first hour. If 
the volume of urine exceeds 2 c.c. per minute the maximum 
clearance is calculated ; if less than this, the standard clearance, 
by means of the formulae given. It is important that the bladder 
be completely evacuated on each occasion and that the volume 
of urine be accurately measured. In subjects with marked 
renal deficiency the test should l>e performed in the recumbent 
position. In actual practice many obser\'er8 find that the 
standard clearance does not always give satisfactory results, 
and recommend that the maximum clearance be used. In 
order to ensure that the kidney is working to full capacity 
it is customary, immediately the bladder has first been 
emptied, to give a dose of 15 to 20 grm. of urea in 300 
c.c. of water, and to give a further 300 c.c. of water at 
the end of the first half-hour. Even with these precautions 
a fairly high proportion of subjects, especially those with 
renal or cardiac disease, fail to give a sufficient diuresis 
for the satisfactory application of the test. It is of course 
unnecessary to give urea when the blood urea is already 
known to be over 80 or more milligrams per 100 c.c. A 
further difficulty arises, as it is never certain that the 
bladder has been completely emptied, and routine oatheterisa' 
tion is certainly not justified. 

The Urea Clearance Test is regarded as the most sensitive 
test of renal function at present available, but its successful 
performance demands the most meticulous attention to details. 
It gives valuable information in the hands of those skilled in 
its use and interpretation. 



TESTS OF RENAL FUNCTION 683 

In assessing results it is important to remember that urea 
clearance varies directly with renal blood flow, which, of course, 
alters from minute to minute. Within a certain range, there- 
fore, variations in clearance are evidence of normal response 
by the kidney. This normal range is from 76 to 130 per cent, 
of the average normal. Values over 75, therefore, represent 
normal renal function; from 76 to 60 are considered doubt- 
ful ; and if factors causing “ functional ” uraemia (p. 693) can 
be excluded, values below 50 indicate impairment of renal 
function. 

Inolin and Diodrast Clearance Tests. — ^The principle of the 
Clearance Test has been applied by Homer-Smith and others 
with conspicuous success to the separate estimation of glomerular 
and tubular functions. For this purpose the inert polysaccharide 
inulin and the organic iodine compound diodrast are substi- 
tuted for urea. Inulin being neither secreted nor reabsorbed 
by the tubular epithelium can Ikj xised to ascertain the rate 
of glomerular filtration, while diodrast, which is excreted 
mainly by tubular secretion, gives a measure of tubular function. 
Simultaneous estimations of inulin and diodrast clearances 
have revealed degrees of impairment of renal function not 
shown by the use of the less sensitive renal function tests 
which have been described above. Thus in benign essential 
hypertension a considerable degree of impairment of renal 
function can be demonstrated by the use of inulin and diodrast 
clearances, which is not apparent with either the urea clearance 
or the specific gravity (concentration) tests. 

In their present form the technique of the inulin and 
diodrast clearance tests is too elaborate for routine use. 
For details of their application the original papers should 
be consulted. 

Alkaline Tide and Renal Funelion . — In some forms of 
Bright’s disease the alkaline tide diminishes or disappears. 
Under suitable circumstances this fact may be used as an 
early indication of impairment of renal function. Thus, 
if the reaction (pH) of the pre- and post-breakfast speci- 
mens of urine be charted daily in a series of cases of 
scarlet fever, the diminution or disappearance of the 
alkaline tide will readily be seen when renal function 
becomes impaired, and this may occur some days before the 
appearance of frank signs of renal disease such as albuminuria 
or hsematuria. In fact, it is sometimes possible to forecast 
the occurrence of post-scarlatinal or post-tonsillitic nephritis 
in this manner. 



684 


RENAL DISEASES 


SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF RENAL DISEASE 

Albnmmnrift. — ^Leube (1878) first showed that persistent 
albuminuria occurs in some 6 to 10 per cent, of otherwise 
normal men. This albuminuria appeared to be without patho- 
logical significance and without undue liability to develop 
Bright’s disease. This was apparently confirmed in army 
recruits during the war of 1914718 by Maclean and de Wesselow. 
The more recent work of Dublin, however, on the after-histories 
of a large number of insurance applicants rejected on account 
of this symptom, indicates a more guarded prognosis. A 
thorough clinical examination, together with renal function 
tests repeated at intervals, will help to differentiate between a 
true benign albuminuria and one having pathological significance. 
The presence of more than a few r^ blood cells or casts on 
sevei^ occasions is strong evidence of an active renal lesion. 

It has long been known that even in normal urine small 
numbers of casts and red and white blood cells are present. 
Addis has evolved a quantitative method for the estimation of 
these elements, which is known as the Addis Sediment Count. 
The technique is difficult, but the method is sometimes of value 
in differentiating between benign and pathological albuminuria. 
Addis gives the following figures from investigations on healthy 
subjects, which he expresses as rates of excretion in the twelve- 
hour night urine : — 

Atibaok. Vaeiatioks. 

OMtf 1,040 0 to 4,270 

Rod blood cells 65,750 0 to 425,000 

White blood cells and epithelial cella 322,550 32,400 to 1 ,000,000 

In a doubtful case of albuminuria a persistent and marked 
excess of any or all of these elements woiild point to the |nresenoe 
of an active renal lesion. 

Orthostatic Albuminuria {Adolescent, Postural, Lordotic, 
Cyclical Albuminuria). — A variety of albuminuria is found in 
some 15 to 30 per cent, of children and adoleeoents, especially 
those of nervous temperament and poor development. It is 
characterised by the small quantity of albumen present, and the 
readiness with which this disappears with rest. It is believed 
to have no pathological significance and no specific treatment 
is required. DublM’s figures suggest a tendency for such 
adoleeoents to develop pulmonary tuberculosis. Claims that 
the normal albumen ^obulin ratio is reversed in this condition 
do not seem to have been substantiated. 

Symptomatic Albuminuria. — Albuminuria is met with in a 



SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OP RENAL DISEASE 686 

great variety of physiological and pathological conditions. 
Thus it invfikriably accompanies prolonged violent exertion, as 
in football or rowing, especially in the untrained, and may be 
caused by cold baths and emotional stress. It also frequently 
occurs with acute infections of all kinds, especially when 
pyrexia is present, and in passive congestion of the kidneys in 
heart failure, and after convulsions, as in epilepsy. 

Hasmaturia. — ^The appearance of abnormal numbers of red 
blood corpuscles in the urine. Blood may appear in the urine 
as the result of injury or disease of any part of the urinary 
tract or adjacent organs, and in a few diseases of other parts 
of the body. The chief causes of this symptom may be con- 
veniently summarised as follows : — 

1. Haemorrhage from the kidneys : 

(а) Inflammatory : acute nephritis, tuberculosis, 

pyelitis. 

(б) Malignant hypertension — essential benign hyper- 

tension (“ Renal Epistaxis 

(c) Traumatic : calculus, oxaluria, injury. 

(d) Growth : malignant — hypernephroma, carcinoma, 

sarcoma. 

benign — papilloma, angioma, and cap- 
illary naevus of pelvis. 

(e) Blood Diseases : purpura, scurvy, haemophilia. 

(/) Drugs: turpentine, carbolic, hexamine, luminal, 

sulphonaniides. 

(ff) CJongenital cystic kidney, hydronephrosis, aberrant 

renal vessels. 

(A) Embolism and infarction. 

2. From the ureter : ureteric calculus — papilloma. 

3. From the bladder : papilloma, carcinoma, acute cystitis, 

tuberculosis, bilharzda, engorgement of vesical veins 
from adenoma or carcinoma of prostate, calculus, injury. 

4. From the urethra : trauma, acute urethritis, calcidus. 

5. From diseases originating outside the urinary organs : 

extension of abscess from prostate, appendix, pelvis, 
psoas abscess, pyosalpinx, carcinoma of uterus, rectum, 
caecum, sigmoid and pelvic colon, tuberculous ulceration 
of small intestine, and diverticulitis. 

6. Contamination from other sources : menstruation, 

cervicitis, balanitis. 

Occasionally haematuria may occur without demonstrable 
cause and apparently without sequelae. This has been 



686 


RENAL DISEASES 


designated “ essential ” haematuria. A similar idiopathic 
hsematuria occasionally occurs in families. 

Hypertension. — ^The close association between hypertension 
and Wdney disease has long been known. It led to the belief 
that hypertension was always, or generally, due to renal 
disease. The discovery by Mahomed (1874) that hypertension 
often occurred without albuminuria suggested, however, that 
it also arose from extra-renal causes. Two varieties were thus 
recognised — one secondaiy to frank renal disease — renal hyper- 
tension — the other not associated with renal disease and due 
to unknown causes — ‘‘ primary,” or ‘‘ essential,” h>T)ertension. 
A puzzling feature of the latter was the almost invariable 
presence at autopsy of more or less conspicuous vascular 
changes (especially of the afferent arterioles) in the kidneys. 
Since these changes were often very slight, and the hyper- 
tension was knovTi to have been present for many years, it 
was assumed that they were the result of the hypertension, 
and not its cause. 

This dual conception of the origin of hypertension held 
the field until 1934, when Goldblatt et al. succe^ed in produc- 
ing persistent hypertension in dogs by partial constriction 
of the renal arteries with metal clamps. Wilson and Bjnrom 
(1939) then showed that constriction of one renal artery in 
rats resulted in persistent hypertension without changes in 
the corresponding kidney (which was “ protected ” by the 
clamp) whilst vascular lesions (fibrinoid necrosis and endarter- 
itis) characteristic of malignant hypertension in man, developed 
in the undamped (unprotected) kidney, as well as in all the 
other organs commonly affected in this disorder. It was 
proved that whilst renal ischajraia causes hypertension, the 
latter, in turn, induces destructive vascular lesions in the 
kidneys and elsewhere. A vicious circle is thus set up. A 
similar sequence is believed to be the explanation of the pro- 
gressive course of many types of chronic renal disease. 

These experiments, however, do not explain by what 
mechanism renal ischaemia causes hypertension. It is probable 
that experimental (constrictive) hypertension is caused by 
chemical means and not tlirough the agency of the nervous 
system as it still develops even after preliminary sympathec- 
tomy, or destruction of the spinal cord. The search for the 
responsible pressor agent was long and mainly unsuccessful 
although Tigerstedt and Bergmann (1898) had already described 
a powerful pressor substance which they had extracted from 
the cortex of normal kidneys, and which they named Renin. 
Their work, however, failed to excite much attention until 



SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF RENAL DISEASE 687 

recently when the isolation and properties of renin have been 
the subject of intensive study. 

The mode of action of renin is complicated but may be 
summarised thus : it is a protein extracted only from the 
renal cortex. It behaves as an enzyme, and causes vaso- 
constriction only in the presence of another constituent of 
normal blood (renin activator : prehypertensin or preangio- 
tonin) which is associated with the pseudoglobulin fraction 
of the blood. Prehypertensin is probably produced in the 
liver but only when the adrenal cortex is functioning normally. 
Renin reacts with prehypertensin (which becomes used up) 
to produce a third substance — hypertensin (angiotonin), the 
effective pressor substance. Finally, hypertensin itself is 
destroyed by another enzyme — hypertensinase (antirenin), 
which is found in normal kidney and in other tissues. 

It can scarcely be doubted that experimental (constrictive) 
hypertension is due to liberation of renin from an ischaemic 
kidney, but that this mechanism is the cause of persistent 
hypertension in man is not yet proved. There is, however, 
much experimental evidence to suggest that the h 3 rperten 6 ion 
of benign and malignant essential hypertension, as well as 
that of chronic glomerular nephritis, may have a similar 
origin. 

HirpertensiTe Retinopathy (Retinitis). — Retinal lesions, apart 
from oedema, are rare in renal disease except as a manifestation 
of hypertension. They occur in two main forms : (1) hyper- 
tensive n^uro-retinopathy, and (2) arteriosclerotic retinopcUhy, 
Since neither inflammation nor albuminuria is directly con- 
cerned in the pathogenesis of either form the terms “ retinitis,” 
and “ renal,” or “ albuminuric,” retinitis are inapplicable and 
should not be used. 

1. Hypertensive neuro -retinopathy occurs in those forms 
of Bright’s disease associated with marked and persistent 
hypertension. It is met with therefore in chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis, chronic pyelonephritis, malignant hj’pertension and 
toxaemia of pregnancy. The early stages of neuro-retinopathy 
may be seen in acute glomerulo-nephritis but they commonly 
regress. The chief ophthalmoscopic findings are : (a) slight 
swelling and redness of the disc with blurring of its margins, 
and these are often the earliest signs ; (6) a greyish fogging of 
the retina beginning at the disc and facing towards the per- 
iphery ; (c) the appearance of white spots (“ cotton-wool,” or 
“ snow-bank ” spots) of fatty and cedematous change in a 
^de area surrounding the disc, which later become transformed 
into glistening white or yellow, sharply defined, opaque, spots 



688 RGNAL DISEASES 

aimilar to those fotind in arteriosolerotio retinopathy ; {d) linear, 
round, flame-shaped or irregularly shaped, hsemorrhages ; 
(c) Tutrrow, brightly striped (“ silver wire ”), but not conspicu- 
ously tortuous, arteries, and dilated and engorged veins, l^ny 
factors combine to produce these changes of which the chief 
are : (1) vaso-constriction of the retinal arterioles, (2) acute 
necrotising arteriohtis, and (3) increased intracranial pressure. 
The very varied ophthalmoscopic picture presented in different 
patients and in different stages of the several diseases is mainly 
due to the relative preponderence of one or other of these 
imderlying factors. More than a moderate swelling of the disc 
(t.c., choked disc), for example, implies considerable increase 
of intracranial pressure so that malignant hypertension, either 
as a primary condition, or as complicating an antecedent 
nephritis, may be diagnosed almost with certainty. Hyper- 
tensive neuro-retinopathy is invariably present in malignant 
hypertension, occurs in from 30 to 50 per cent, of cases of chronic 
glomerulo-nephritis, and is frequently met with in toxaemia of 
pregnancy when it is specially liable to cause detachment of 
the retina. Although the lesions of hypertensive neuro- 
retinopathy sometimes cease to progress with temporary 
improvement in the renal disease, the prognosis (except in 
pregnancy toxaemia) is generally grave, few surviving for more 
than two years after the first appearance of retinal changes. 

2. Arteriosclerotic retinopathy also occurs in patients 
suffering firom prolonged hypertension, though not (except in 
diabetes) in arteriosclerosis of the larger vessels without hyper- 
tension. It is generally met with, therefore, in benign essential 
hypertension, though it is often seen in chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis with, or without, hypertensive neuro-retinopathy. 
The main features of this form of retinopathy are : (a) irregu- 
larity in the calibre of the retinal arteriolm, (6) thickening of the 
arterial walls, (c) arterio-venous compression, (d) increased 
tortuosity of the vessels, (e) absence of oedema of the disc, 
( / ) retinal haemorrhages, linear, rounded or insular in shape, 
few, or many, (g) numerous hard, shiny, white or yellow spots, 
often clustered in a stellate pattern in the region of the macula. 
Soft, “woolly,” spots do not occur. It may be noted that 
narrowing of the retinal arterioles is a sign of vaso-oonstriotion, 
not of arteriosclerosis. In the latter the vessels tend to be 
thickened, and therefore wide. Histological examination 
has shown that arteriosclerosis of the retinal vessels may be 
present before ophthahnoscopic evidence is apparent. Although 
arteriosclerotic retinopathy is essentially a bilateral condition 
the characteristic retinal picture may be confined to one side 



(EDEMA 


689 


for long periods in a high proportion of the cjases. Occasionally 
ischeemic atrophy of the disc results. The prognosis is, of 
course, determined by that of the primary condition so that 
it is usually not good. On the other hand, this form of retino- 
pathy, unlike hypertensive neuro -retinopathy, is oftenjcom- 
patible with many years of fair health. 

(EDEMA 

Dropsy, though still a prominent symptom in many of the 
principal forms of Bright’s disease, does not dominate the 
clinical picture in civilised communities to the extent that it 
did at the time Bright wrote his classical papers. It is still, 
however, a prominent feature in nephritis occurring in tmder- 
nourished races. From this it may be inferred that, whatever 
the precise pathogenesis of oedema in nephritis, its development 
is favoured by an underlying state of malnutrition and all that 
that may imply. (Edema in Bright’s disease may be considered 
under three headings — cardiac, nephritic, and nephrotic, and 
its treatment is discussed in the appropriate sections (q.v.). 

Cardiac CBSdema* — Cardiac oedema is of frequent occurrence 
in those forms of Bright’s disease characterised by arterial 
hypertension, f.6., in primary granular kidney and in chronic 
glomerular nephritis. Heart failure in these conditions is a 
common event, and is generally the immediate cause of death. 
In some oases of acute nephritis the heart gives way in face 
of a sudden increase of blood pressure, and a cardiac oedema is 
superimposed upon a nephritic oedema. CJardiac oedema may 
generally be recognised by accompanying signs of back-pressure 
such as dyspnoea, cyanosis, and enlargement of the hver, and 
by the api)earance of oedema in the dependent parts. It is 
essentially due to increase in the capillary blood pressure, but 
the deficient circulation also injures the capillary wall, as 
shown by the moderate increase in the protein content of the 
oedema fluid, which is generally about 0*5 per cent. Estima- 
tion of the blood cholesterol is sometimes of value in differenti- 
ating between a cardiac and a nephrotic oedema. An increase 
in the blood cholesterol (above about 220 mg. per 100 c.c.) 
is suggestive of the latter. 

Nephritio CBdema. — ^Nephritic oedema is not primarily due 
to circulatory embarrassment and is less influenced by gravity. 
Posture therefore plays only a secondary part in its distribution. 
Nephritic oedema typically begins in the face, though later it 
may extend to the whole body. In many instances, however, 
in ambulatory oases, oedema is first noticed in the feet or ankles. 



m 


RENAL DISEASES 


The oause of nephritic oedema is believed to be an increased 
permeability of the capillaries throughout the body, which 
permits the escape of water and proteins into the tissue spaces. 
The protein content of the oedema fluid is therefore high, 
generally over 1 *0 per cent. 

Nepbotic (Edpma. — Nephrotic oedema does not differ from 
nephritic oedema in its clinical characteristics or distribution. 
It is due to diminished colloid osmotic pressure of the plasma 
proteins, caused mainly by continued loss of proteins into the 
urine. The protein content of the oedema fluid is low and 
generally under 0-1 per cent. It is met with in nephrosis, the 
nephrotic stage of glomerular nephritis, and in amyloid disease 
of the kidney. It also results from diminution of the plasma 
proteins from extra -renal causes, i.e., without loss of protein 
in the urine, as from malnutrition in hunger oedema, and in 
the gross ascites of cirrhosis of the liver, in which large amounts 
of protein are withdrawn from the blood. It will be noted that 
of the three forms of oedema commonly met with in cases of 
renal disease, two, namely cardiac and nephritic oedema, are 
entirely extra -renal in origin. Only one, nephrotic oedema, is 
caused chiefly by renal disease. These three types of oedema 
may occur singly or combined, so that the pathogenesis of the 
oedema in many cases of renal disease is often exceedingly 
complex. 

AZOT.EM1A AND URiEMIA 

The term uraemia (or urimemia) was originally used to 
describe the symptom complex which was believed to result 
from the intoxication of blood imperfectly piurified by the 
kidneys ; in other words, poisoning with urine. Before it was 
realised that many of the signs and symptoms of Bright’s 
disease occurred independently of renal insufficiency it was 
customary to attribute them all to this cause. Thus, the 
numerous hypertensive symptoms of Bright’s disease, especially 
those of hypertensive encephalopathy, l)ecamo included under 
the heading of uraemia. The term is now restricted to those 
signs and symptoms which directly and inmriatdy accompany 
the retention of urinary constituents in the bloc^ as a result 
of remU insufficiency. In spite of the fact that none of the 
known oonstituents of the urine, alone or together, is directly 
capable of reproducing any of the clinical manifestations of 
this state, it is exceedingly useful to retain the term, as defined, 
in clinical medicine. 

It will be recalled (p. 674) that the expression renal in- 
sufficiency ” is used to denote uncompensated impairment of 



AZOT.EMIA AND URAEMIA 69l 

renal function. It follows that uraemia must be accompanied 
by azotaemia (increased nitrogen content of the blood). Until 
recently, it was believed that azotaemia often occurred without 
renal insufficiency, and even with normal renal function — so 
called “ extra-renal ” azotaemia, or uraemia (p. 675). It would 
now seem that azotaemia generally occurs only as a result of 
renal insufficiency, and that the term ‘‘ extra-renal,” used in 
this connection, is misleading. Both azotaemia and uraemia, 
therefore, are essentially renal in origin. Azotaemia may, 
however, occur without uraemia when renal insufficiency is 
not severe enough to give rise to clinical signs. Both azotaemia 
and uraemia may be associated with structural changes in 
the kidneys, or may occur without such — functional azotaemia 
and uraemia. Functional uraemia may conveniently be con- 
sidered separately because, although it differs only in degree, 
and not in kind, from uraemia associated with structural changes 
in the kidjieys, it generally arises from very different causes. It is 
important to remember that functional uraemia may I>e added to 
an existing ura?mia and tlius increase the gravity of the latter. 

Symptoms of Uraemia.- The sjnnptoms of uncomplicated 
uraemia are l>e8t seen when mechanical obstruction to the flow 
of urine is present, because for a long period the symptoms are 
not obscured by those of an added hypertension. For this 
reason they are more often observed by the surgeon than the 
physician. They are 

1. Mental and physical fatigue, weakness, drowsiness, and 

duUness which suggests narcosis. The physical fatigue 
may be extreme, quite intolerable, and may dominate 
the whole clinical picture. 

2. Excitation phenomena : involuntary coarse muscular 

contractions, especially of extensor groups, increased 
tendon and skin reflexes, contraction of the pupils, 
deep breathing and hiccoughs. 

3. Rapid loss of weight and emaciation. 

4. Ahmentary disturbances, such as anorexia, vomiting, and 

diarrhoea. 

5. Tendency to inflammation and necrosis, pharyngitis, 

laryngitis, stomatitis, gastritis, enteritis, necrotic ulcers 
of the mouth, stomach, intestines and colon, and often 
pericarditis. 

6. Urinary smell in the breath. 

7. Subnormal temperature. 

8. Cardiac irregularities — usually dropped beats, sometimes 

preceding sudden death. 



692 


RENAL DISEASES 


Asthenia is the most constant symptom. It is important to 
realise that severe headache and convulsions are not a feature of 
true uraemia but of an associated hypertensive enoephadopathy. 
It is of interest to note that of the symptoms listed all but 
numbers 1 and 3 generally do not occur until the blood urea 
is at least 200 mg. per 100 c.c. Sudden aud unexpected 
death occurs in about 8 per cent, of cases of uraemia. In some, 
but not all, it is associated with an excessive accumulation of 
the potassium ion in the blood. 

Treatment of Uraemia. — Before beginning treatment it is 
important to differentiate clearly between the symptoms of 
uraemia (t.c., the syndrome resulting from renal insufficiency) 
and those of hypertensive encephalopathy because the two 
conditions so frequently occur together, especially in chronic 
Bright’s disease. Since there are no direct means of improving 
ren^ function the treatment of uraemia consists essentisdly in 
diminishing the accumulation of waste-products in the body. 
This is achieved firstly by increasing the output of urine, and 
secondly, by limiting the diet. Treatment should be controlled 
by estimations of the blood urea at least every few days. 

When there is neither intractable vomiting nor coma the 
fluid intake should be increased to not less than four (and not 
much more than five) pints by mouth in twenty-four hours. 
If diuresis sufficient to diminish the blood urea does not result, 
the low protein diet described on page 705, should be given as 
well. Diuretics other than alkaline salts are contraindicated. 
The alkaline mixture mentioned on page 735 may be given by 
mouth (or as a 3 per cent, solution per rectum or intravenously) 
to combat acidosis and to stimulate diuresis when increasing 
the fluid intake and dietetic measures fail. Alkaline therapy, 
however, should never be attempted unless it is controlled by 
repeated estimations of the alkali reserve and the potassium con- 
tent of the blood . When such facilities are not available it is safer 
to give normal, or slightly hypertonic (2 or 3 per cent.), saline or 5 
per cent, glucose, intravenously. 

Some degree of heart failure often occurs in urasmia and for 
this digitalis may be given, and frequently results in increasing 
the output of urine. Tetany, also, often complicates ursemia 
and for this calcium chloride (1 gr. in 30 m inim s of water or 
saline) may be given intramusci^rly and may be repeated, 
or calcium gluconate and parathormone (p. 283) may be 
tried. 

Theoretically the extra-renal elimination of waste-products 
should be encouraged, but in practice such methods as purgation, 
diaphoresis and venesection are ineffective and even harmful, 



AZOT.EMIA AND URAEMIA 


693 


and should be avoided. When, however, uraemia is associated 
with hypertensive encephalopathy, venesection may be required 
(p. 798). Blood transfusion, except for profound anaemia, is 
always contraindicated. 

Intrcu^able vomiting may sometimes be controlled by gastric 
lavage, cocaine (i gr.) by mouth, or morphia. Pruritus may be 
relieved by ergotamine to 1 mg., t.i.d.) iJy mouth, bromides, 
or morphia. Persistent hiccough may be controlled by re- 
breathing into a closed paper baig, or morphia may be required. 

For restlessness and insomnia any of the usual sedatives 
may be used, since none has amy peculiar advantages in uraemia. 
All must, however, be given with caution since the kidneys 
are unable to excrete any excess. 

Sudden, unexpected (and unexplained) death occurs in about 
5 per cent, of all cases of severe uraemia (excluding functional 
uraemia), and it is important to warn relatives of this possibility. 

Functional UrsBUiia. — ’This condition, formerly known as 
“extra-renal” uraemia, is met with in a very large number of 
widely different disorders, among the more important of which 
may be cited : — 

1. Vomiting, severe amd protraacted from any cause, but 

especially in high intestinal obstruction, hyperemesis 
gravidarum, and in the vomiting which accompanies 
uraemia in Bright’s diseaise (t.e., a “ functional ” 
uraemia may be superimposed upon a non-functional 
uraemia). 

2. Intestinal obstruction without vomiting, but with re- 

tention of fluid in the intestinal tract — awjute dilatation 
of the stomaeh. 

3. Diarrhoea, severe and prolonged, from any cause. 

4. Gastro-intestinal haemorrhaige (severe) — haematemesis or 

melaena. 

6. In “ shock,” whether due to trauma, surgical operations, 
associated with extensive bums, or in canliac infarction. 

6. Acute liver disease — acute hepatic necrosis and the so- 

called hepato-renal syndrome. 

7. Diabetic eKsidosis. 

8. Addison’s disease. 

9. Fevers. 

10. Sepsis — empyema, peritonitis, etc. 

11. Heart failure. 

12. Peripheral circulatory collapse — associated with any of 

the above or with other d^rders. 

13. Alkalosis — as in the alkaline treatment of peptic ulcers. 



694 


RENAL DISEASES 


The clinical features are often difficult to define, since they 
aie apt to be overshadowed by those of the acconapanying, or 
primary, disorder. Irritability, depression, and insomnia, and 
an unpleasant and sometimes “ metallic ” taste, are common 
and early 83nnptoms. Lassitude and lethargy, leading to stupor 
and coma, are also, frequently present. There may be a dull 
headache, but severe headache and convulsions do not occur. 
Involuntary muscular twitchings, vomiting, diarrhoea, pruritus 
and urinous odour in the breath have all been observed but 
are not common. The symptoms, in fact, are those of mild 
uraemia as seen in xuinary obstruction and in Bright’s disease, 
though unlike the latter they are not usually complicated by 
those of hypertensive enoephaJopathy. 

Azotaemia is as a rule moderate in degree, the blood luea 
being from 50 to 100 mg. per 100 c.c., though values of 400 
and 500 mg. per 100 c.c. are occasionally met with. Owing 
to the frequency with which persistent vomiting accompanies 
the causal condition the azotaemia is apt to be associated with 
an alkalosis and a hypochloraemia. Since, too, the causal con- 
dition is generally aissociated with loss of fluid from the body 
(vomiting and diarrhoea), or its diversion into the tissues (oedema 
formation), marked oliguria often occurs. The specific gravity 
of the urine is generally high, though, relatively to the small 
volume, it is below normal, loss of concentrating ability being 
thus masked. Formed elements and albumen do not appear 
in the urine until the condition has been present for some days, 
when slight albuminuria and a few red blood cells and casts 
are apt to appear. Absence of these qualitative signs of renal 
disease in the early stages also obscures the renal origin of 
the azotaemia. Functional azotaemia differs from the non- 
functional variety in another respect — the high concentration 
of urea in the urine in the former. This is due to the increased 
protein katabolism which occurs in so many of the causal 
disorders. 

Many theories have been advanced to explain the meohamism 
by which renal function becomes impaired in the absence of 
structural changes in the kidneys. By far the most important 
factor which influences renal function from moment to moment 
both in health and in disease is the amount of blood flowing 
through the kidneys. Diminution in the total quantity of 
blood in oiroulation must mean a diminished return to the 
heart, a fall in cardiac output and a diminished blood flow 
through all the organs of the body. For a time the more vital 
organs, the b^irt and brain, will maintain (through arteriolar 
constriction) their blood flow at the expense of less immediately 



AZOTiEMIA AND URAEMIA 


695 


important organs such as the kidneys. In functional uraemia, 
however, it is not at first the heart which fails but the peripheral 
circulation. Peripheral circulatory collapse (known clinically 
as ‘‘ shock ”) is a conspicuous feature of all conditions causing 
functional uraemia. Functional uraemia is therefore caused by 
“ shock,” Prognosis and treatment likewise are the same as in 
‘‘ shock ” What ultimately causes shock is another question 
(see p. 668). 

Anuria. — Anuria may be divided into four main aetiological 
groups : (1) Pre-renal, (2) Renal ; (3) Post-renal, and (4) 

Combined Group. The chief pre-reTial causes are — inadequate 
fluid intake or excessive fluid loss, vomiting, diarrhoea, 
and severe haemorrhage ; shock, and any of the causes of 
functional uraemia (p. 693) ; reflex anuria, e.gr., catheterisation 
or calculus. Renal anuria is met with in acute nephritis and 
toxaemia of pregnancy ; advanced chronic nephritis, pyelo- 
nephritis, hydronephrosis, bilateral cortical necrosis ; acute 
necrotising nephrosis (burns and poisoning with heavy metals). 
Post-renal anuria is mainly due to urinary obstruction firom any 
cause, whilst the anuria of blackwater fever, incompatible 
blood transfusion (p. 344), the crush syndrome and that which 
occurs in sulphonamide therapy are due to a combination of 
tubular obstruction and tubular degeneration. 

Treatment of Anuria . — Anuria is more liable to arise when 
the kidneys are previously diseased. Careful preliminary 
examination and selection of patients before instituting treat- 
ment likely to cause anuria, e.g^., surgical operations, anaesthetics, 
and blood transfusions, are therefore important preventive 
measures. Treatment of the underlying cause often relieves 
anuria so that specific measures should be deferred until the 
anuria has persisted for at le^st forty-eight hours. 

Fluids should always be given by mouth when possible, 
or even per rectum, in preference to the intravenous route. 
It is first necessary to determine whether the anuria is associated 
with (a) severe dehydration and (6) an acidosis or an alkalosis. 
Dehydration can usually be assessed on clinical grounds. 
When present the fluid intake should be not less than 5 to 6 
pints per twenty-four hours. When there is no obvious 
dehydration the fluid intake need not exceed 4 pints. Anuria 
is usually associated with an acidosis, but alkalosis may accom- 
pany severe and persistent vomiting or prolonged hyperpnoea. 
Except when alkalosis is present or suspected the alkaline 
mixture described on page 735 should be given by mouth at 
hourly intervals (or when necessary as a 3 per cent, solution 
per rectum) until either the of urii%e excretion is at least 



696 


RENAL DISEASES 


30 to 40 oz. per twenty-four hours (ascertained if necessary 
by passing a catheter at six-hourly intervals), or symptoms of 
intolerance (tetany) develop. In the latter event treatment 
must be abandoned. When €ui adequate diuresis occurs the 
quantity of alkali should be reduced by increasing the intervals 
between doses at first to two hours, then three hours, and so 
on, provided a satisfactory rate of urine excretion is maintained. 
If this method fails, or alkalosis is already present, a solution 
of 5 per cent, glucose should be given intravenously at the 
rate of 50 drops per minute (i.e., 6 pints in twenty-four hours). 
Acid salts (t.e., ammonium chlpride) should not be given to 
combat alkalosis. 

Sodium citrate and bicarbonate should be substituted for 
{>ota8sium citrate in the above mixture when the potassium 
content of the blood is likely to be already above normal, e.g., 
in the renal insuflSciency of chronic Bright’s disease and in 
the crush syndrome. Renal decapsulation is sometimes 
advocated for anuria but its value has not been established. 

The Crush Syndrome. — ^Aerial bombardment during the 
present war has led to many instances of persons being pinned 
beneath fallen masonry for many hours. A frequent result 
is compression of a limb with consequent necrosis and autolysis 
of striated muscle and liberation of large amounts of myo- 
haemoglobin and potassium into the blood and urine. Apart 
from the local trauma, and symptoms of haemorrhage and 
shock, the main clinical feature is a marked and progressive 
oliguria accompanied by myohasmoglobinuria and numerous 
pigmented casts in the urine, leading to complete anuria, 
azotaemia and death from uraemia. The renal tubules, especially 
the ascending limb of Henle’s loop and the second convoluted 
tubule, are largely obstructed by the pigmented casts con- 
taining myohaemoglobin, though the anuria is also in part due 
to damaged renal epithelium. Treatment consists in giving 
alkaline salts (sodium citrate and bicarbonate, not potassium 
salts), preferably by mouth, otherwise by intravenous drip. 


BRIGHTS DISEASE 

In 1827 Dr Richard Bright of Guy’s Hospital pointed out 
that ooagulable urine and dropsy were often associated with 
disease of the kidneys. Thereafter such conditions were known 
as Bright’s Disease. It later became apparent that many 
differrat pathological states were included under this heading, 
so that the expression Bright’s ** Diseases,” is more accurate. 



DIFFUSE GLOMERULO NEPHRITIS 


697 


It is customary and convenient to retain the term as a group- 
name for certain non-suppurative renal disorders, chief among 
which are : all forms of nephritis, nephrosis, and nephrosclerosis, 
and their cardio-vascular sequehe ; chronic pyelonephritis ; 
the renal complications of pregnancy and diabetes ; and such 
conditions as amyloid disease of the kidney, renal dwarfism, 
etc. Recent work on renin (p. 687) suggests also that most 
instances of “ essential ” hypertension should be restored to 
the family of Bright’s Diseases, from which they were removed 
following the work of Mohamed some seventy years ago. 

After heart disease, Bright’s disease, in one or other of its 
numerous forms, is the most common cause of death in this 
country, and its morbidity greatly exceeds the recorded 
mortality. At autopsy it is found in a gross form more than 
twice as often as it is diagnosed in life. It is also certain 
that a large, though as yet imdetermined (estimates vary from 
40 to 70 per cent.), proportion of disorders masquerading in 
official lists as heart disease is mainly renal in origin and should 
appear under the heading of Bright’s disease. 

Despite the more dramatic appeal of cancer and tuberculosis, 
Bright’s Disease is the most important medical problem of 
the day. 

No completely satisfactory classification of the various forms 
of Bright’s disease has yet been evolved. A simple and practical 
scheme is to divide them into three main groups as follows : — 

(1) Nephritis. 

(2) Nephrosis. 

(3) Primary Nephrosclerosis. 

Nephritis (Syn. ; Acute and Chronic Diffuse Glomerular, 
or Glomerulo-tubular, Nephritis. Nephritis may be defined 
as a “ bilateral non-suppurative inflammatory disease of the 
kidneys (Osier), and occurs in four forms : — 

(o) Diffuse glomerulo-nephritis (aoute,subacute,and chronic). 

(b) Focal non-embolic ^omerulo-nephritis. 

(c) Focal embolic glomerulo-nephritis. 

{d) Acute interstitial “ nephritis.” 


DIFFUSE GLOMERULO-NEPHRITIS 

In all forms of nephritis the three main structures of the 
kidney — ^the vasculature (including the glomerular tuft), the 
tubules (including Bowman’s capsule), and the interstitium — 



698 


RENAL DISEASES 


are simultaneously or successively involved. Glomerulo- 
nephritis is so called to emphasise that the initial lesion occurs 
in the glomerular tuft (Klebs 1876). The adjectives diffuse 
and focal are used to distinguish between two forms of the 
disease — the former in which all, or most, of the glomeruli are 
simultaneously affected from the outset, and the latter in 
which only a few glomeruli, or even only occasional loops of 
some of the tufts, are involved. 

In its most typical and complete form diffuse glomerulo- 
nephritis is charMterised . by th^ stages : acute, subacute, 
and chronic. The corresponding anatomical terminology for 
these stages is — ^the blood-dripping kidney ; the large white 
kidney (one form of), and the secondary contracted, or 
small white, kidney. Clinically they are known respectively 
as Acute Nephritis, Subacute or Nephrotic Nephritis, and 
Chronic Nephritis. It is worth emphasising that the term 
Chronic Nephritis applies strictly to the third or chronic stage 
of diffuse glomerulo-nephritis, and to no other form of Bright’s 
disease. 

Often the disease passes through each successive stage, 
sometimes rapidly (two months fi:t)m onset to death in the 
third stage), and sometimes very slowly (twenty years or longer). 
The relative duration of each stage varies enormously, and 
transition from one stage to the next may be comparatively 
abrupt or almost imperceptible. In spite of these diversities 
the leading features of each stage are relatively distinct and 
the diagnosis is not usually difficult. Frequently the disease 
becomes arrested at the acute stage, and occasionally after 
the subacute stage. Very often the acute stage is so mild 
that it escapes recognition, and the patient is ^t seen with 
well-marked signs and symptoms of the subacute or chronic 
stages. In others, many months or even years after apparent 
recovery from the acute stage, signs and symptoms of the 
chronic stage are noticed, the subacute stage being missed. 
The long silent interval between the acute and chronic stages 
is sometimes referred to as the latent stage of glomerulo-nephritis. 
Much more frequently than is generally realised a large number 
of various infections is accompanied and followed by a low- 
grade glomerulo-nephritis, revealed only by careful and repeated 
examinations of the urine. Unsuspected or svhdinical nephritis 
of this kind is an important cause of “ idiopathic ” chronic 
glomerulo-nephritis. Generally speaking, however, the three 
main stages of diffuse glomerulo-nephritis are so distinct that 
it is convenient to describe them separately. 



RENAL DISEASES 


699 


ACUTE GLOMERULO-NEPHRITIS 
{ACUTE NEPHRITIS) 

Acute nephritis probably always results from a previous 
infection elsewhere in the body, though cold and exposure are 
devitalising and therefore pr^isposing causes. In some 80 
per cent, of cases in civilians it follows a streptococcal infection 
of the tonsils or other parts of the upper respiratory tract ; 
its incidence is therefore greatest in childhood. Scarlet fever 
was the foremost cause, but of recent years the incidence and 
severity of this disease has much diminished, and it now 
accounts for only a very small proportion of the total number 
of cases of acute nephritis. Other infections, such as pyodermia, 
pneumonia, infected wounds, malaria, and influenza, are 
occasional causes. It is curiously rare in erysipelas. Acute 
nephritis (diffuse form) also sometimes accompanies rheumatic 
fever, purpura, and subacute bacterial endocarditis. 

Age Incidence, — ^The age incidence is that of the primary 
infection, and the disease is therefore most frequent in childhood 
and early adolescence. 

Sex Incide^ice, — At all ages acute nephritis is more common 
in males, roughly in the proportion of three to two, and this 
is attributed to the greater likelihood of exposure. There is 
evidence that this disparity in the sex distribution is becoming 
less marked. 

Familial Incidence, — Acute nepliritis occurring in several 
members of a family, either simultaneously or at intervals, is 
not very uncommon, but it is doubtful how far this is coincidence 
and how far it is due to familial predisposition. 

Epidemics, — Epidemics of acute nephritis were observed 
during the American Civil War, the war of 1914-18, when it 
was Imown as “ trench nephritis,” and the influenza epidemic 
of 1929. Po 8 t- 80 €u:latinal glomerulo-nepluitis is more common 
in some years than in others. 

Exposure and Chill, — Exposure and chill, especially associ- 
ated with a wetting, have long been regarded as important causes. 
There is little doubt that they act as predisposing causes of 
infection, and in this manner give rise to acute nephritis. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^The kidneys are usually normal in size, 
or large, soft, congested, and drip blood — the ” blood dripping ” 
kidney. The capsule strips easily. On section there is good 
differentiation between cortex and medulla, and the glomeruli 
may stand out as pale-greyish or dark-red points. Micro- 
BcopkaUy the initial lesion is an endocapillaritis of the capillary 



700 


RENAL DISEASES 


loops of all tlie glomeruli, which are swollen, occluded, and 
empty of blood. This is followed by proliferation of the endo- 
thelium of the loops and the appearance of polynuclear leuco- 
cytes within the glomerulus, and the whole tuft becomes 
enlarged. The walls of the glomerular loops undergo hyaline 
degeneration, individual loops often fusing. Albuminous 
exudate and red cells escape into the capsular space. The 
cells of the tubules in this stage often show little change, 
slight cloudy swelling, or fatty degeneration. The lumen of 
the tubules may contain blood, albumen, and casts. The arteries 
also often show little change at first, though later a necrotising 
arteriolitis of the afferent arterioles and thrombosis may be 
found. In cases which do not resolve, thickening and hyalinisa- 
tion of the glomerular loops occur after a few weeks or months 
and the capsular epithelium proliferates, forming the character- 
istic ‘‘ epithelial crescents.” The case has then entered the 
subacute stage. It wUl be observed that the fundamental lesion 
in the kidneys in acute nephritis is a diffuse endocapUlaritis, 
i.6., it is primarily a disease of the vascular system. The 
tubules are only secondarily involved, mainly as a result of 
diminished supply of blood from the corresponding diseased 
glomerulus. 

Pathogenesis. — ^The renal lesions in acute nephritis are not 
due to the presence of the infecting organism in the kidneys, 
for they are rarely found there, but to the injury set up by 
circulating toxins. This injury, however, is not a direct one due 
to bacterial toxins, for nephritis does not generally arise until 
some time after the initial infection and more often than not 
during convalescence, t.e., long after the concentration of circu- 
lating bacterial toxins has diminished. This latent interval is of 
much importance in a consideration of the pathogenesis of the 
disease. In analogy with the latent interval in serum sickness, 
and because of other evidence, both clinical and experimental, 
it is thought that the renal lesions are due to a hypersensitive 
state developed during the acquisition of immunity. For 
example, acute diffuse glomerulo -nephritis frequently occurs 
in the course of subacute bacterial endocarditis, not during 
the active septicaemic stage, but later during a bacteria-firee 
stage. This constitutes the allergic ” theory of the patho- 
genesis of acute nephritis. Another theory is that acute 
nephritis is but the local manifestation of a generalised cajnllary 
diasase. This is supported by the fact that osdema frequently 
occurs so early and may precede the albuminuria, and that 
the high protein content of the osdema fluid suggests injury 
and increased permeability of the capillaries an over the 



ACUTE GLOMERULO NEPHRITIS 70 1 

body. Finally, miorosoopical examination of the capillaries 
of the nail-b^ in acute nephritis has shown tortuosity and 
thickening of these vessels. Volhard interprets the ischaemia 
of the afferent glomerular capillaries in the early stages of 
acute nephritis as evidence of local vascular spasm, and regards 
the hypertension, narrowing of the retinal vessels, and pallor 
of the skin as evidence of a generalised vascular spasm 
(Volhard’s Angio-Spastic Theory). Hypertension, however, is 
not invariably present, nor are the capillary loops always 
completely devoid of blood. The view now mostly held is that 
the characteristic changes in the kidney and in the arterioles 
throughout the body in acute diffuse glomerulo -nephritis 
represent the reaction of these tissues to the overproduction 
of immune bodies which constitute the noxious agents or 
“ toxins concerned. 

Clinical Picture. — The clinical picture and course are 
extremely varied. The urinary changes, cardio-vascular signs, 
or oedema, may dominate the picture, alone or in any combina- 
tion, either throughout or at different stages of the disease. 
The signs and symptoms of the primary infection may over- 
shadow those of the nephritis. The course, too, is varied 
and may be rapid or slow. The onset likewise may be sudden 
or insidious. Fulminating cases also occur. Often there 
is a latent interval between the primary infection and the 
appearance of signs and symptoms of nephritis. Hsematuria 
and oedema are nsually the first clinical signs, but either may 
occur alone or precede the other by some days. Puffiness 
of the eyelids in the morning is a common initial symptom 
and is often followed by swelling of the feet, legs and external 
genitalia in the course of a few days. The urine may be 
bloody and scanty and there may be frequency, urgency, 
and lumbar pain or aching. Vomiting and abdominal pain 
with high temperature are common in chfidren, and occasionally 
in them the attack begins with acute cerebral symptoms, such 
as headache and convulsions. In some instances the onset is 
insidious : there is no obvious heematuria but some swelling of 
the ankles is noticed, perhaps after a walk, which later increases 
and spreads to other parts of the body. In more severe cases 
the oedema becomes generalised and involves the serous cavities, 
the lungs, alimentary oanal« causing vomiting and diarrhoea, 
and the brain, resulting in the headaches and convulsions of 
hypertensive encephalopathy. Urinary abnormalities, perhaps 
discovered on routine examination, may constitute the whole 
picture, but usually firank haematuria occurs at the outset and 
then diminishes in quantity, the urine assuming a smoky tint 



702 


RENAL DISEASES 


and finally becoming normal in appearanoe. Red blood cells, 
however, persist on microscopical examination for weeks or 
months after the urine appears normal to the naked eye. 
Albuminuria is constantly present throughout the course of the 
disease, and varies considerably in quantity, which, however, is 
only roughly proportional to the severity of the condition. 
The volume of urine is always diminished at the outset and 
may only amount to a few ounces in the twenty-four hours. 
Th^ oliguria is, however, chiefly extra-renal in origin and the 
specific gravity of the urine is usually high. A low volume, 
with a low specific gravity, means severe impairment of renal 
function and the prognosis is grave. Complete anuria at the 
onset, and continued for more than three or four days, is of bad 
omen, though it does not necessarily indicate a fatal issue. 
In the early stages the urine is nearly always very acid, and 
diminishing acidity indicates a commencing diuresis and is a 
favourable sign. Casts of all kinds, including blood and e})i- 
thelial casts, are present in the early stages. They vary consider- 
ably in number from time to time, and, if much bk)od is present, 
diligent search may l)c required to find them. In the majority 
the blood pressure is increased at least in the early stages. 
In mild cases, however, there may be no hypertension. As a 
rule the blood pressure becomes normal in tW course of two or 
three weeks, and before the other manifestations of the disease 
have disappeared. It is not sufficiently realised that the 
heart is almost invariably affected, even in mUd cases. Modem 
methods show enlargement of the heart in the earliest stages, 
due partly to acute left ventricular dilatation and slight 
hydropericardium. Left ventricular hypertrophy may appear 
in from four to five weeks. Bradycardia sometimes develops. 
In other oases, mild myocardial insufficiency is shown by 
tachycardia, palpitations, dyspnoea, and inability to lie on the 
left side. Death from sudden heart failure, especially in children, 
is not exceedingly rare and may be quite unexpect^. In other 
cases heart failure may rapidly develop following a convulsion 
or attack of vomiting with acute pulmonary oedema, cyanosis, 
and orthopnoea. Hypertensive encephalopathy may develop at 
any stage during which the blood pressure is elevated, though 
it is rare at the onset. Convulsions are lees common now than 
formerly when copious fluids were given, and death in a first 
attack is very rare. The prognosis when convulsive attacks 
are repeated at short intervals is grave. Recovery firom a amgle 
attack of convulsions, especially at the outset, however, is often 
followed by unexpected improvement in the further oourae of 
the disease. Renal function, as measured by ordinary tests, 



ACUTE GLOMERULO NEPHRITIS 703 

is often quite normal even in severe cases with gross oedema 
and marked hypertension. Death from ursemia is a rare event 
in the early stages, and generally renal function does not 
become seriously impaired until the case enters the sub-chronic 
or chronic stages. The nitrogen retention, which is so often 
found in the early stages, is mainly due to increased protein 
katabolism. The blood count is generally normal and, despite 
the paUor, anaemia is rare in the early stages. Frank retino- 
pathy is rare, but some narrowing of the retinal vessels, and 
small retinal haemorrhages, are not uncommon. During the 
formation of oedema the skin may be unusually dry. 

Diagnosis. — The only conditions likely to cause difficulty in 
diagnosis are : an acute exacerbation of a chronic nephritis, 
focal nephritis, and subacute bacterial endocarditis. Gross 
enlargement of the heart in the absence of symptoms of heart 
failure suggests an acute exacerbation of an underlying chronic 
nephritis. (Edema, hypertension, or impairment of renal 
function are inconsistent with a diagnosis of either focal 
nephritis or the glomerular embolisation of subacute bacterial 
endocarditis, but typical diffuse glomerulo -nephritis progressing 
to chronic nephritis frequently complicates the later stages 
of subacute bacterial endocarditis. 

Coarse and Prognosis. — In a series of 5,000 cases followed over 
a period of years it was found that some 60 per cent, recovered 
completely in the course of a few weeks or months ; the majority 
in six to eight weeks from the onset. The longer recovery is 
delayed the less likely is it to be complete, though even after 
five or ten years, with persistent but mild urinar}" signs, eventual 
recovery is not very tmcomraon. Some 40 per cent, did not 
recover within tw’o or three months of the onset. About 12 
per cent, developed chronic nephritis either with or without 
passing through a more or less well-defined second or subacute 
stage ; 1 1 per cent, progressed to a form of chronic nephritis 
with azotasmia but without hypertension, sometimes referred 
to as “ aplastic Bright’s disease ” ; 10 per cent, developed 
persistent hypertension without other signs of renal disease ; 
and 7 per cent, continued to pass large quantities of albumen 
in the urine indefinitely, without other signs of nephritis, a 
condition known as ** leaky kidney.” Death during the acute 
stage is rare, and occurs in less than 5 per cent, of cases. 
Generally, when there is a definite history of a preceding 
infection, the onset is brusque, hcematurfa is a prominent 
symptom, and the ultimate prognosis is good. When there is 
no history of a previous infection the onset tends to be insidious, 
oedema is more conspicuous than hsematuria, and the prospect 



704 


RENAL DISEASES 


of recovery is very much less. Some maintain that these two 
varieties are distinct diseases, but numerous mixed and transi- 
tional types occur so that all that can be said with safety is 
that in general, and especially in children, the more bloody the 
urine at the onset the better the outlook. The tendency to 
chronioity is greater in the nephritis following tonsillitis and 
other infections than in post-scarlatinal nephritis. Acute 
nephritis developing after the active stage of sul>aoute bacterial 
endocarditis generally becomes chronic. Nephritis complicating 
non-thrombocytopenic purpura in young persons has a particu- 
larly bad prognosis. In all cases of acute nephritis extreme 
oliguria is dangerous, and anuria persisting for more than four 
daj^ is often fatal. Acute myocardial failure with pulmonary 
oedema is the most common cause of death, and pneumonia 
and hypertensive encephalopathy are the next most common. 
The amount of oedema, hsematuria, or albuminuria bear no 
relation to the immediate or ultimate prognosis. The chances 
of complete recovery, however, are inversely proportional to 
the length of time required for any one of these symptoms to 
abate. This is particularly true with regard to hypertension, 
though, of course, hypertension may be entirely absent in some 
cases which die from ursemia. Urtemia, however, is a comx>ara- 
tively rare cause of death in acute nephritis. Age at onset is 
an important factor. The older the subject at the onset of 
the nephritis, the less likely is complete recovery, largely 
owing to the increasing tendency for hyx>ertension to develop 
and to persist with age. 

TaKATMBNT OX ACXTTB DhTUSB GLOVBBtTlO-NBFHBITIS 

Prophylaxis. — ^The incidence of acute nephritis is as high 
in those who have previously had their tonsils removed as in 
those who have not. Tonsillectomy, therefore, is useless as a 
prophylactic measure. Neither is there evidence that the early 
use of anti-scarlatinal serum, in cases of scarlet fever, reduces 
the incidence of post-scarlatinal nephritis. To attain this 
object the only effective measures are prolonged confinement 
to bed, combined with the administration of sufficient alkali 
by mouth (Pot. Cit. and Sod. Bio. in equal parts) to render 
the urine persistently as alkaline as, or a little more alkaline 
than, the blood, i.e., pH greater than 7-4. It is possible 
that similar meastfres applied to patients with tonsillitis would 
result also in diminishing the incidence of post-tonsillitic 
nephritis ; but unfortunately this is not always practicable. 
Sulphonamide therapy has not been proved to diminish the 



ACUTE GLOMERtfLO-NEPHRITlS 70^ 

incidence of acute nephritis as a complication of acute infections. 
Its use in established nephritis is generally contraindicated. 

General Management. — Strict confinement to bed is impera- 
tive in the earlier stages. Avoidance of chill is important and 
flannel garments only should be worn. The fluid intake and 
urinary volume should be accurately measured and recorded 
every twenty-four hours, together with an estimation of the 
specific gravity of a sample of the twenty-four hours’ urine. 
Methods of producing profuse sweating, such as hot air-baths, 
hot packs, and the injection of pilocarpine, are best avoided. 
No purges of any kind should ever be given. Regular action 
of the bowels should be maintained by simple lubricants such 
as liquid paraffin, or soap and water enemata. 

Dietary. — In early and severe cases absolute starvation, 
as recommended by Volhard, ?.e., no fluids and no solids, 
should be enforced for three or four days. Experience has 
showm that patients suffer surprisingly little discomfort under 
this drastic treatment if a little orange juice be given to moisten 
the mouth. In less severe cases half a glass of lemonade with 
added glucose is givem thrice daily, and half an orange night 
and morning. After the first three days this is increased to 
a pint of lemonade or orange juice per diem, with added glucose 
and some cooked fruit. Thereafter the fluid intake is regulated 
to correspond with the previous twenty-four hour volume of 
urine, and solids are given as follows : — 

Early morning — sweetened drink. 

Breakfast — fruit, cooked or raw. 

Lunch — potatoes w ith/rc^sA butter, compote of fruit. 

4.0 p.M. — fruit, cooked or raw. 

Dinner — same as lunch. 

This diet is a considerable aid to lessening hypertension, cedema, 
albuminuria, and especially haematuria. It is an adequate 
maintenance diet, albeit dull, for a patient confined to bed and 
should be continued if possible until any or all of the afore- 
mentioned symptoms have abated and show no further daily 
improvement. Thereafter the diet shoidd gradually be increased 
by the addition of substances having the lowest sodium 
content — eggs, boiled fish, chicken, etc. It will be noted that 
neither milk nor bread are included in this diet. Return to a 
full diet must depend on the patient’s subsequent progress, 
but should not be imduly delay^. 

Drugs. — No diuretics of any kind should ever be used in 
the early stages of acute nephritis, though potassium citrate, 
in doses sufficient to render the urine i)ersi8tently a l kal i n e, is a 

45 



50(i RENAL DISEASES 

valuable aid to recovery if used at the right time. It should 
never be given in the presence of macroscopic h^Bmaturia, but 
should be exhibited as soon as the urine becomes firee from 
blood to the naked eye, and provided there is then no serious 
degree of impairment of renal function. 

Surgical Treatment. — Decapsulation is sometimes practised 
for persistent anuria. There is no satisfactory evidence that 
it does good, and the oi)eration is rightly falling into disuse. 
Generally, little can be done in this stage, but the intravenous 
injection of hypertonic solutions (30 c.c. of 30 per cent. NaCl or 
30 c.c. of 50 per cent, glucose) may be tried, in addition, of 
course, to local measures such as hot poultices over the loins. 
Tonsillectomy should never be carried out during the early 
stages of acute nephritis, and rarely even later with the object 
of improving the renal condition or preventing relapses or 
progression to the chronic stage. The results of tonsillectomy, 
on the subsequent course of acute nephritis, are definitely 
disappointing. Operations designed to relieve sinus infections 
are also generally of little benefit to the renal condition. 

Treatment of Special Symptoms. — ^The blood pressure should 
be taken at least thrice weekly in all cases, owng to the danger 
of comparatively sudden cardiac failure. Should the blood 
procure be rising rapidly, immediate venesection should l>e 
done. The tendency is to remove too little blood, and less than 
20 oz. in an adult is usually ineffective. Digitalis may be given 
but its value is doubtful. Hypertension does not contraindicate 
its use. Hypertensive encephalopathy should be treated by 
immediate and generous venesection, followed, if necessary, by 
lumbar puncture. Uraemia is treated as de8cril>ed on page 692. 

Duration of Confinement to Bed. — There are so many patients 
in whom slight amounts of albumen and a few red cells persist 
in the urine for months and years, that it is manifestly im- 
possible to urge strict confinement to bed until all signs of the 
disease have disappeared. As a general rule, strict rest in bed 
should be maintained until no single sign or symptom shows 
evidence of further improvement over a period of one month, 
if possible mcluding in the signs and symptoms the alkali 
reserve of the blood plasma and the sedimentation rate of the 
red blood corpuscles. Certainly, until the two latter have 
returned to normal, the patient cannot be regarded as having 
regained a normal state of health, even in the absence of any 
signs of renal disease, and until then should not lead a full 
and normal life. The process of getting up from bed shotdd be 
gradual and carefully watched. A return or exacerbation of 
any one sign or symptom, lasting for more than forty-eight 



707 


SUBACUTE GLOMERULO-NEPHRmS 

hours, should mean a further i)eriod of strict rest in bed. 
Convalescence in the country, and residence in dry, warm 
climates, serve less as a direct stimulus to recovery of the local 
lesion than as an aid to overcoming long and te^ous, though 
necessary, hospitalisation. In this respect it may indirectly 
improve the renal condition. 

After-care. — The after-care in acute nephritis is much the 
same as that advocated in healed or latent pulmonary tuber- 
culosis, namely, adequate rest, avoidance of chills, and prompt 
return to bed for some days upon the slightest signs of any 
infection. The urine shoidd be tested at regular intervals for 
albumen for several j^ears ; and during this time, if the patient 
is not in obviously good general health, it is a wise precaution 
to keep the urine alkaline by taking suflScient potassium citrate 
daily by mouth, as a precaution against relapses due to inter- 
current infections. The sedimentation rate should be estimated 
at first at monthly and then at quarterly intervals. 


SUBACUTE GLOMERULO-NEPHRITIS 

(Syn. Second, or Nephrotic, Stage ; Nephrotic Nephritis ; 
Chronic Parenchymatous Nephritis ; Large White Kidney ; 

Mydin Kidyiey) 

Subacute nepliritis is a transitional stage between the first, 
or acute, and the tliird, or clironic, stages of diffuse glomerulo- 
nephritis. In its most tjq)ieal form it is characterised by gross 
albuminuria and oedema without macroscopic ha^maturia, 
hypertension, or impaired renal function. Often, however, it 
is represented only by urinary signs (latent nephritis) following 
an incompletely recovered acute stage or by one of the residual 
forms mentioned on page 703. 

iEtiology. — When traceable the aetiology is that of the 
acute stage. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The kidneys are large, pale, soft, and 
often congested. The capsule strips easily, and on section 
there is good differentiation between cortex and medulla. 
The cut surface is greasy and flecked vdth yellow areas of 
pseudo-fatty or lipoid degeneration (myelin kidney). Macro- 
scopically, the cliief changes are — increased tubular degenera- 
tion with evidenoe of epitlielial proliferation and regenera- 
tion, particularly in the formation of numerous epithelial 
‘‘ crescents ; inoreausing glomerular obstruction largely due 
to the crescents ; and the evidence of early fibrosis in the 
interstitium. A few completely hyaline glomeruli are found but 



708 


RENAL DISEASES 


they are not yet shrunken. Vascular changes are not con- 
spicuous though hyaline thickening of some of the afferent 
arterioles may be seen. Similar, but more marked, changes 
are seen in later phases (called by some “early” or “sub- 
chronic” nephritis) and these merge imperceptibly into the 
characteristic histological picture of chronic glomerulo-nephritis 
(secondary contracted kidney). 

Clinical Picture. — The typical clinical (and biochemical) 
picture is identical with that of primary chronic nephrosis 
(p. 719). The terras “nephrotic syndrome,” “nephrotic 
stage,” or “ nephrotic nephritis,” are sometimes applied to this 
stage. In spite of its superficial resemblance to primary neph- 
rosis there are important differences. Thus a history of a 
preceding acute stage, or of an attack of haematuria, is not 
imcommon in subacute nephritis. Either would, by definition, 
exclude primary nephrosis. Again, the eventual appearance 
of hypertension or impairment of renal function is almost 
the rule in subacute nephritis but very rare in primary nephrosis. 
For some years, therefore, it may not be po-ssible to make a 
correct diagnosis. 

Prognosis. — Progression to chronic nephritis is the general 
rule. There is evidence, however, that recovery is not so rare 
as was formerly supposed, even when urinary signs have 
persisted for as long as ten years after the onset of the acute 
stage. Since an interv'al of some years may elapse before 
either unequivocal signs of chronic nephritis (hj’pertension or 
impairment of renal function) appear or recovery takes place, 
it is important not to leave the [>atient without hope. As 
at this stage the physician is often unable to forecast the 
(mtcome with certainty, it is preferable in practice to substitute 
the expression unresolved (acute) nephritis for the term sub- 
acute nephritis which has acquired a perhaps not quite justifiable 
connotation of inevitable doom. 

Treatment. — When gross oedema and albuminuria are the 
dominant features the treatment is that described for chronic 
nephrosis on page 721. When there is no cedemaand only urinary 
signs are present, prolonged rest in bed, a full and varied diet, 
moderate doses of alkaline salts, and moral encoura^ment 
are all required. Later, graduated oxercis(;s and selection of 
a suitable occupation are essential. The degree and duration 
of bed-rest, exercise, and general management can only be 
assessed by continuous supervision and the careful study of 
clinical and laboratory data collected at regular intervals and 
graphed. 



RENAL DISEASES 


709 


CHRONIC GLOMERULO NEPHRITIS 

(8yn, Chronic Nephritis ; Chronic Hoemorrhagic Nephritis ; 
Chronic Interstitial Nephritis (one form of) ; Glomerulo- 
nephritis (third stage of) ; Secondary Contracted Kidney ; 

Small White Kidney) 

iEtiology and Occurrence. — It is now believed that chronic 
glomerulo-nepliritis always arises from a preceding attack of 
acute glomerulo-nephritis. The latter either clears up entirely 
or progresses to the chronic stage (a) after passing through 
one of the forms of the subacute stage already described, or 
(b) after apparent recovery (latent stage), or (c) from a previously 
unsuspected subclinical glomerulo-nephritis (q.v.). The factors 
which determine chronicity are mainly unknown. Chronic 
nephritis w^ould seem to be more likely to follow tonsillitis than 
scarlet fever. Acute glomerulo-nephritis, with an insidious onset 
without a definite preceding infection and chiefly characterised 
by cedema wthout gross haematuria as an initial symptom, is 
also more liable to become chronic. Macroscopic haematuria 
persisting undiminished for more than about six weeks is also 
a bad prognostic sign with regard to chronicity. On the other 
hand, the tendency to become chronic is not related to the 
severity of the acute attack. The age at the onset of the acute 
attack, however, does exert an influence on the liability to 
chronicity, which is more marked in older subjects, except in 
the aged, when the acute disease often runs a particularly 
benign course. Chronic nephritis occurs at all ages, but chiefly 
in early life and under thirty-five years of age. It is more 
prevalent in the male sex, as is the acute disease. 

Pathological Anatomy. — The typical kidney of this stage is 
small and granular (small white kidney, secondary contracted 
kidney). It is hard and has a thickened capsule which does not 
strip readily. The granulations are fine and of a pale yellowish 
colour, which contrasts with the darker coloured shrunken areas 
surrounding them. On section the cortex is narrow and 
irregular, and large areas of fibrosis and lipoid degeneration 
occur. Demarcation from the medulla is poor. The vessels are 
markedly thickened. There is an increase of the peripelvic fat. 

Microscopic Appeara^iccs, — There is marked proliferation 
of the interstitial connective tissue. Arteriolar lesions are 
prominent and consist mainly of endarteritis obliterans and 
medial hypertrophy. In long-standing cases arteriolosclerosis 
and necrotising arteriolitis may also occur. In the later stages 
(secondary contraotedl kidney) the histological picture is an 



710 


RENAL DISEASES 


advanced stage of that just described, in which hyalinisation 
and fibrosis of glomeruli, atrophy of tubules, and increase of 
the interstitial tissue reach enormous proportions. Evidence 
of epithebal proliferation is lost or is confin^ to small scattered 
areas. 

Symptoms. — ^The presenting symptoms are many and varied 
and include headache, visual disturbances, asthenia, anorexia, 
anaemia, polyuria, oedema, haematuria, epistaxis, and dyspnoea. 
These, with clinical and biochemical evidence of hypertension, 
impairment of renal function and the characteristic urinary 
changes, make up the clinical picture of chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis. When aU, or many, of these signs and symptoms 
are present the diagnosis is usually not difficult. When one or 
two predominate for a long period diagnosis may not be easy. 

The exceedingly complex clinical picture of the chronic 
stage of diffuse glomerulo-nepliritis can be most satisfactorily 
interpreted by realising that all, or most, of the individual 
signs and symptoms arise not directly from a diseased kidney 
but indirectly from at least three more or less independent 
pathological processes each of which is initiated in the diseased 
kidney. These processes behave as independent, though 
often simultaneously operating, vicious circles. Thus the 
only direct evidence of renal disease in chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis, or, indeed, in any form of Bright’s disease, is afforded 
by changes in the urine — oliguria, diminished concentrating 
ability, albuminuria, hsematuria, and cylindruria. Other signs 
and symptoms arise indirectly from either (a) hypertension 
— ^which, in turn, causes cardio -vascular changes, retinopathy, 
amaurosis, epistaxis — and the cerebral manifestations known 
as hypertensive encephalopathy ; or (6) impairment of renal 
function — ^which gives rise to azotemia, polyuria, asthenia, 
anorexia, muscular thatchings, tetany, pruritus, ansemia, 
acidosis, and dyspnoea; or (c) albuminuria — ^with consequent 
hypoproteinsemia, oedema, and headaches. One or other of 
these vicious circles is present in most varieties of Bright’s 
disease but only in chronic glomerulo-nephritis are all three 
commonly operating simultaneously over a long period. 
Although these three fundamental pathological processes 
arise, and may operate, independently, in combination they 
influence one another. Thus the cerebral consequences of 
hypertension are undoubtedly aggravated by cerebral oedema 
due to the albuminuria-hyi)oproteina3mia syndrome, as in 
acute nephritis and eclampsia. Again, oedema frequently 
disappears on the supervention of impaiment of renal frmetion 
and azotemia. Hypertension, also, whilst on the one hand 



CHRONIC GLOMERULO NEPHRITIS 711 

facilitating glomerular filtration also causes increased renal 
ischaemia and ultimately renal failure. The symptoms, course, 
and duration of chronic glomerulo -nephritis, in fact, depend 
largely upon the intensity and the mutual influence of these 
three processes. 

Individual Signs and Symptoms. — Hypertension . — It cannot 
be too strongly emphasised that hypertension is not an invariable 
symptom of chronic nephritis. Many cases run their complete 
course and terminate in uraemia without hypertension. It is, 
however, a very common feature and frequently dominates 
the clinical picture, and, when present, largely determines the 
prognosis. In such cases death from gradual myocardial 
failure often occurs and may be foretold by a progressive fall 
in the blood pressure over a x>eriod of weeks or months. Indeed, 
in chronic nephritis a falling blood pressure is often a most 
unfavourable sign. 

Urcemia. — Paradoxically, death from uncomplicated uraemia 
is not very common in chronic nephritis. Heart failure is 
by far the most common immediate cause of death. Some 
cases remain in the stage of compensated impairment of renal 
function for years, but once impairment of function occurs it 
does not improve. 

Anaemia . — A hxpochromic anaemia, with low colour index, 
is exceedingly common and may be very severe. As a rule the 
anaemia does not appear until renal function becomes impaired. 
It is roughly parallel to the degree of impairment, and may 
in turn cause further loss of function through insufficient 
oxygenation of the renal cells. If purpura occurs the platelet 
count is usually normal. 

The Urine . — Albuminuria is almost constantly present in 
chronic glomerulo-nephritis. In the later stages albuminuria 
is less, and at times there may be only a trace or even none. 
Whereas diminution in the amount of albumen passed in the 
urine is generally a favourable sign in chronic nephritis, the 
reverse is often the case when it marks the onset of severe con- 
traction of the kidney, and increasing impairment of renal 
function. Casts of many kinds, epithelial, fatty, granular, and 
hyaline, are also frequently present in the urine in early chronic 
nephritis. In the terminal stage they become fewer in number, 
and may often be absent or represented by an occasional 
hyaline cast. Macroscopic hsematuria is not a common feature 
of chronic nephritis except during acute exacerbations, and 
when necrotising arteriolitis (malignant hypertension) super- 
venes. Red cells, however, are constantly found on micro- 
scopical examination throughout the disease. 



712 


RENAL DISEASES 


Diagnosis. — In children and adolescents, in whom albumin- 
uria is the only abnormal feature, the diagnosis has to be made 
from the benign albuminurias described above {vide p. 684). 
Hypertension with slight albuminuria may cause confusion 
with essential hypertension with commencing renal involvement. 
The differential diagnosis is often impossible, but it should be 
borne in mind that glomerulo-nephritis most often occurs 
under thirty years of age, and essential hypertension over this 
age. Polycystic disease of the kidneys may simulate glomerulo- 
nephritis, but the kidneys are generally obviously enlarged, and 
characteristic changes are found in the renal pelves with the 
aid of a pyelogram. The diagnosis from long-standing pyelo- 
nephritis is often completely impossible, though here, also, 
pyelograms may assist. Anaemia may be so profound as to 
suggest pernicious anaemia or leukaemia. It should be remem- 
bered in this connection, too, that uraemia is a frequent cause of 
“ idiopathic ’’ purpura in middle age and over. Myxoedema 
also may superficially resemble chronic neplmtis. 

Prognosis. — Chronic nephritis is ultimately fatal. Two 
factors govern the duration of tliis stage — cardio -vascular 
complications and impairment of renal function. Life may 
continue for several years with both, but once symptoms arise 
from either, a fatal issue is to be expected, generally within 
a few months. In all cases and at all stages, intercurrent 
infections constitute a grave danger. 

Treatment. — Treatment is essentially palliative though much 
may sometimes be done to prolong life and make it more tolerable. 
The immediate object of treatment is to secure rest for (a) the 
kidneys and (6) the heart . This is achieved not only by physical 
rest in bed but by appropriate adjustments of the diet and fluid 
intake and the administration of drugs according to the clinical 
and biochemical state of the patient. 

R^ime , — Confinement to bed for an initial period is advis- 
able in nearly all cases. This should be continued, whether it 
be for a period of weeks or months, until it is considered that 
no single sign or symptom is likely to improve further. The 
process of getting the patient up must be effected slowly, and 
graded by the use of the couch, chair, and walking, succes- 
sively. Elderly patients, however, suffering from marked renal 
insufficiency which is known to be of long duration, and who 
have been ambulant, should not suddenly bo confined to bed as 
they have often become attuned to their state and are unable to 
readjust themselves rapidly to new conditions. 

Diet , — ^The diet in chronic nephritis should be regulated by 
the renal function. Renal function tests should th^fore be 



CHRONIC GLOMERULO NEPHRITIS 


713 


performed at frequent intervals . So long as renal function remains 
normal, and there is no macroscopic haematuria, a full allowance 
of protein may be given. There is no evidence that red meat is 
more harmful than so-called white meat, such as fish or chicken. 
The total quantity of protein need only be diminished when 
evidence of decompensation occurs, i.e., when the blood urea 
increases. Even then it is generally possible and desirable to 
permit meat at least once a day. Under no circumstances must 
the protein intake be allowed to fall below 0*7 grm. per kilo, 
of body-weight per diem, except in emergencies, and then not 
for a longer period than ten to fourteen days. Prolonged 
protein deprivation leads to anfcmia with further diminution 
of renal function and increased endogenous protein katabolism. 

Salt Intake , — Restriction of salt should be imposed (a) when 
oedema is a prominent feature, (b) with cerebral or cardiac 
symptoms resulting from marked hypertension, and (c) with 
prolonged macroscopic haematuria. It is generally sufficient 
to omit added salt but to allow that used in cooking, except 
in the treatment of haematuria, when an absolute salt-fi*ee diet 
is important. 

Fluid Intake . — When impairment of renal function and 
oedema coexist, the former must take precedence in treatment 
and the fluid intake should be increased to that which will 
produce the maximum volume of urine, even at the risk of 
increasing the oedema. If, as a result of increasing the fluid 
intake, the urinary volume is not augmented, then diuretics, 
as indicated in the next paragraph, must be employed in 
addition. When renal function is normal, as it usually is when 
oedema is a marked feature, the fluid intake should be restricted, 
but to not much less than the volume of urine for the preceding 
twenty-four fours, and never to the point of inducing thirst. 

Drugs . — Digitalis may be used in myocardial failure, w hether 
hypertension is present or not. As in acute nephritis, diuretics 
should not be used as a routine in the presence of macroscopic 
haematuria. They should be employed as an aid to inducing 
polyuria as mentioned above, and for this purxx)se potassium 
citrate by mouth is the most useful. It should first be ascer- 
tained that the potassium content of the blood is not already' 
above normal. Mercurial diuretics, such as salyrgan, are contra- 
indicated. Iron may be given, as iron and ammonium citrate 
(90 to 120 gr. per diem), for anaemia, and occasionally blood 
transfusion is required in extreme emergencies, but the danger 
of subsequent anuria is very great even with careful grouping. 
For violent headaches whi^ do not respond to low salt diet, 
hypertonic magnesium sulphate (6 per cent, solution) may be 



714 


RENAL DISEASES 


given rectally twice daily, or nitrites, bromides, barbiturates, 
or morphine may be given. Venesection followed by lumbar 
puncture is, however, often more effective. The fluid balance 
in the body, and particularly the volume of urine excreted, 
should never be upset by the giving of purges. Only liquid 
parafl&n or simple enemata should be given. For similar 
reasons, diaphoresis is undesirable. Large quantities of fluids 
of any kind should never be given intravenously. 

Surgical Treatment , — Infective foci, such as septic tonsils, 
sinuses, and teeth, are generally better left untouched, but 
acute conditions, such as mastoiditis or appendicitis, must be 
dealt with surgically. 

SUBCLINICAL GlOMERULO-NEPHRITIS 

This, the least spectacular variety of glomerulo -nephritis, 
is in one respect the most important, for although there are 
no symptoms and few signs, it is undoubtedly the cause of the 
great majority of cases of chronic glomerulo -nephritis in whom 
no history of a previous attack of acute nephritis is obtainable. 
The patient is always entirely unaware of its existence and the 
physician generally is, unless from Ixjing aware of the possi- 
bility or for some other reason special search is made. The 
introduction of a quantitative method of studying the formed 
elements in the urine (the Addis sediment count), more delicate 
tests of renal function, statistical inquiries into the correlations 
between glomerulo -nephritis and other diseases, and the critical 
examination of microscopical sections of kidneys from subjects 
without frank renal disease and dying from numerous other, 
mainly infective, or post-infective, diseases, show that low- 
grade glomerulo -nephritis without symptoms is an exceedingly 
common event. Few kidneys, in fact, on careful examination, 
fail to show some evidence of previous healed glomerular damage. 
In the majority the lesions are slight and focal in distribution 
and the recovery rate must certainly be very high. Probably, 
too, in the majority, the most careful laboratory investigations 
would fail to reveal any abnormalities. In some, however, 
and the total number must be very large, secondary, or sympto- 
matic, nephritis of this kind and degree undoubtedly occurs 
in and after infections and fevers of all kinds. Its potential 
importance as a source of later chronic glomerulo -nephritis 
is so great that more thorough investigation in, and stricter 
criteria regarding recovery firom, and return to work after, 
infections in general, should be adopted. It is perhaps less 
important at present to determine whether this variety of 



CHRONIC GLOMERULO-NEPHRinS 


715 


glomerulo -nephritis is to be regarded as a form of focal nephritis, 
or as a latent stage of diflhise nephritis, than it is to recognise 
its prevalence and significance. It can only be diagnosed by 
repeated search for intermittent and slight albuminuria, or 
the occasional presence of a few red blood cells or casts, during 
or following an acute infection. When discovered it should, 
of course, be most thoroughly treated in spite of the apparently 
trivial signs. Treatment includes rest in bed, moderate 
alkalinisation of the urine, a normal diet and return to full 
activity in stages regulated by the urinary signs, the alkali 
reserve of the blood and the blood sedimentation rate, as in 
the period of recovery from frank acute nephritis. 

Focal (Non-bmbolic) Glomerxtlo-nephritis 

This variety occurs mainly in children suffering from a 
number of acute infections, notably streptococcal tonsillitis 
and mastoiditis, and less frequently from pneumonia, scarlet 
fever, erysipelas, typhoid, measles, rheumatic fever and some 
forms of purpura. In contrast with diffuse nephritis it is 
supposed to occur at the height of the primary infection instead 
of after an interval. Some authorities do not accept this. 
Unlike the diffuse form too, it is stated that the causal organism 
is sometimes found in the kidneys and in the urine. The 
essential lesion is an acute glomerulitis affecting only compara- 
tively few glomeruli and only individual loops of a single tuft. 
Neither hypertension, azotsemia, nor oedema are therefore to 
be expected, and do not occur. Clinically the disease is 
characterised by sudden and often profuse hsematuria which 
often clears in the course of a few days, though sometimes a 
few red cells persist in the urine for many months. Albuminuria 
is present but usually not in excess of the amount of blood. 
Casts of all kinds appear at the onset. The prognosis is almost 
invariably favourable except in rare instances in which repeated 
attacks ultimately involve a large proportion of the nephrons, 
and renal function becomes impaired. There is some doubt 
as to whether this variety is a distinct form of acute nephritis 
and not merely a mild type of acute diffuse nephritis. 

Focal Eiubolic Glomkrulo-nbphbitis 
{MtUtiple Otomerular Embolisation) 

This variety of acute neidiritis occurs only during the 
active (baoteridemic) stage of subacute bacterial endocc^tis, 
in whi<^ it causes repeated transient attacks of hsematuria 



716 


RENAI^ DISEASES 


without oedema, hypertension, or azoteemia. Bacterial emboli 
are lodged in the glomerular tufts. It is quite distinct from the 
non-embolic diffuse glomerulo-nephritis which so frequently 
complicates the later inactive (non-bacteriaemic) stages of 
subacute bacterial endocarditis and leads to progressive renal 
insufficiency and death from uraDmia. 

Acute Interstitial “ Nephritis ” 

This comparatively rare condition gives no indication of its 
presence during life, and is really not a form of nephritis at all, 
in that the nephrons aure not affected, although it is customary 
to describe it under this name. Microscopically the essential 
lesion is a focal infiltration of the interstitium of the kidney 
with lymphocytes. It does not give rise to symptoms. It 
occurs chiefly in children in the course of very severe and 
fatal streptococcal infections such as tonsillitis, scarlet fever, 
and septicaemia. 


THE NEPHROSES 

The word nephrosis was introduced b}^ Mueller in 1905 to 
distinguish the primary degenerative from the primary in- 
flammatory nephropatliies. Nephrosis may be defined as a 
primary non-inflarnmaiory degeneration of the renal parenchyma 
(tubules) and therefore includes a largo variety of pathological 
changes and their clinical counterparts, ranging from a transient 
cloudy swelling of the cells of the tubuIc^s, as in febrile albu- 
minuria, to the most extreme lipoid degeneration of these 
cells as in chronic lipoid nephrosis. Some authorities restrict 
the term nephrosis entirely to chronic cases, the chief patho- 
logical change in which is a li]x>id infiltration of the tubular 
epithelium, but it would seem more logical to adopt the wider 
definition given above and to classify the main sub-varieties 
thus: (1) larval, (2) nccrotising, (3) acute, and (4) chronic — 
simple and lipoid nephroses. 

Larval Nephrosis 

This is characterised clinically by albuminuria and patho- 
logically by cloudy swelling, and sometimes fatty degeneration 
of the tubular epithelium. Under this heading- are included 
the febrile albuminurias, and the albuminuria of pulmonary 
tuberculosis, jaundice, pernicious ansemia, and of many other 
conditions. Renal function is rarely impaired, and oedema 
and hypertension do not occur. 



THE NEPHROSES 


717 


Necbotising Nephrosis 

This is similar to the preceding variety in its pathology, but 
the degenerative processes are more severe, and actual necrosis 
of the tubular epithelium is present, so that renal function may 
be grossly impaired. It occurs only occasionally after infec- 
tions, and then generally in very severe cases. Necrotising 
nephrosis most commonly results from poisoning with various 
chemical agents, particularly with the salts of the heavy metals, 
such 08 mercury, bismuth, and gold. It is most frequently 
encountered as a result of poisoning with bichloride of mercury. 
It may aLso result from poisoning with phosphorus, neo- 
salvarsaii, chloroform, and lysol, and may complicate bums, 
yellow fever, cholera, diabetes, and liigh intestinal obstruction. 
It causes oliguria and anuria, which, unless relieved, lead to 
death from urajmia. 


Acute Nephrosis 

This is clinically a fairly distinct group, though patho- 
logically it may only be an exaggerated example of the larval 
variety. It occurs mostly in young children, in wdiom marked 
generalised oxiema with gross albuminuria arises, either without 
obvious cause or following an acute pneumococcal infection. 
The kidneys are large, smooth, soft, and pale or congested. 
Microscopically the cliief lesion is a well-marked cloudy 
swelling of the renal tubules. Although the onset is com- 
paratively rapid, the coiii'se may be slow^ and the condition 
may l>eoome chronic. It is believed that approximately a 
third of the cases recover after some montlis, but in others 
rela[) 8 es are common, often caused by some intercurrent 
infection. Such ej)i 8 ode 8 are often fatal. Pneumococcal 
jjeritonitis is a frequent complication, and accounts for many 
deaths, though it is not invariably fatal. iSurgical intervention 
for pneumococcal peritonitis complicating any form of nephrosis 
is of uncertain value. The proj)ortion of recoveries is about the 
same with or without open operation and the writer is now 
inclined to avoid surgical interference, removing purulent 
effusions when possible and necessary by aspiration. 

Chronic Nephrosis 

There is probably no essential difference between simple 
chronic nephrosis and chronic lipoid nephrosis, the latter term 
l)eing used to describe those cases in which lipoid changes are 



718 


RENAL DISEASES 


most marked. There is perhaps a tendency for these latter 
cases to run an even more chrome course. 

Munk, in 1913, pointed out that chronic parenchymatous 
nephritis (large white kidney) really compri^ two distinct 
diseases with a quite different origin, comse, and termination. 
The vast majority began as an acute diffuse glomerulo-nephritis, 
though this phase was often inconspicuous, and terminated 
in azotaemia with hyi)ertension. This group is now referred 
to as the nephrotic stage of chronic glomerulo-nephritis. 
There is also a smaller group, indistinguishable from these 
clinically, but in whom no history of an origin from acute 
glomerulo-nephritis could be obtained, and who rarely, if 
ever, developed either azotaemia or hypertension. This 
form of Bright’s disease is now known as chronic nephrosis. 
It is a rare disease, and the majority diagnosed such on 
clinical grounds are later discovered to be examples of the 
nephrotic stage of glomerulo-nephritis. However, numerous 
authenticated cases liave now been described, and most 
authorities admit its claim as a distinct variety of Bright’s 
disease. Pathologically the kidney is enlarged, soft, smooth, 
and pale, with a capsule which strips readUy. The cut surface 
looks and feels greasy and crontains numerous yellow areas of 
fatty degeneration, ^crosoopically the chief lesion is a marked 
degeneration with fatty change in the cells of the proximal 
convoluted tubules. There is a considerable deposition of 
doubly refractile lipoids in the cells. The lumen of the tubules 
is often filled with epithelial debris and casts. Regeneration 
of tubular cells is common. The glomeruli with ordinary stains 
appear normal, but with special staining methods tliickening 
of the basement membranes of the capillaries of the tuft and 
of Bowman’s capsule can be seen. These changes, though 
slight, are constantly present and are of great theoretic 
importance, as suggesting that chronic nephrosis can no longer 
be regarded as a degeneration confined to the tubules but that 
a glomerular element is aho present, though whether this is 
of primary importance is not yet known. It is also believed 
by some that t^re is a late or terminal stage, in rare instances 
of chronic nephrosis, in which the kidney becomes contracted 
and granular. 

iEtiologj. — Oironic nephrosis is essentially a disease of child- 
hood and young adult life. Some cases definitely follow illfections 
elsewhere in the body, such as sjrphilis, diphtl^ria, pneumonia, 
and tuberculosis, but the majority arise without known cause. 

Pathegeuasii. — The outstandi^ clinical feature of ohronic 
nephrosis is the gross oedema and anasarca associated with 



THE NEPHROSES 


719 


marked albuminuria. The oedema is due mainly to diminution 
of the colloid osmotic pressure of the blood plasma from fall 
in the protein content, particularly the albumen fraction. 
Diminution of the plasma protein is due chiefly to loss of 
albumen in the urine. What causes the albuminuria is not 
known. Several theories are held as to the pathogenesis of 
chronic nephrosis. Firstly, it is maintained by some that 
chronic nephrosis begins as acute glomerulo-nephritis and that 
there is, in fact, no such condition as primary chronic nephrosis ; 
secondly, that it is a primary degenerative disease of the kidney 
in which increased permeability of the renal filter is so great 
that molecules as large as those of albumen get through. Since 
albuminuria is believed to be glomerular in origin, the lesions 
descril)ed above in the glomeruli of chronic nephrosis have an 
added significance ; thirdly, Epstein’s well-known theory 
that chronic nephrosis is a primary metalx)lic dyscrasia and 
that the renal lesions are secondary. 

The Clinical Picture of Chronic Nephrosis. — The onset is 
usually very insidious and there may be a preliminarj" period 
of weeks or months of vague ill-health and lassitude. The 
first sjinptom is often a mild swelling of the face or feet 
in ambrilant patients, which gradually spreads to all parts of 
the body and increases in severity, until the dropsy becomes 
extreme, involving all the extremities and serous cavities. A 
characteristic of this disease is the manner in which the oedema 
waxes and wanes, without obvious cause, over periods of months 
or years. Accompanying the oedema there is a high degree 
of ^buminuria, and during the periods when oedema is forming 
or is increasing there is marked ohguria. Casts may be present 
in the urine, and at times in enormous numbers. Epithehal 
and granular casts predominate and fatty casts may be found. 
Gross haematuria does not occur, though a few red cells may 
be found on microscopical examination in some cases. Hyper- 
tension is absent. There is no disturbance of renal function, 
and the specific gravity of the urine is usually high, even after 
correcting for the large amount of protein present. A charac- 
teristic feature of the blood chemistry is the diminution in the 
total protein content of the plasma and especially of the 
albumen fraction. Accompanjdng this tliero is often a marked 
hpaBmia and hypercholesteraemia. The cliloride content of the 
plasma is on the whole high, and that of the cedema fluid higher 
stiU. The chloride content of the urine is correspondingly low, 
and indeed chlorides may be almost absent from the urine. The 
protein content of the oedema fluid is extremely low (generally 
less than 0*1 per cent,). It often has a milky or opalescent 



720 


RENAL DISEASES 


appearance, due to the presence of lecithins. Doubly refractile 
lipoids are firequently present in the urine, but are not 
characteristic, and are often met with in other conditions, 
notably the nephrotic stage of chronic glomerulo-nephritis. 
The plasma volume is not increased except just prior to the 
onset of diuresis. Despite the pallor, anaemia is not a striking 
feature and severe anaemia is rare. Both water and chloride 
elimination are diminished, but the defect is chiefly or entirely 
extra-renal. Since renal function is normal, uraemia does not 
occur. The basal metabolism is often extremely low. Apart 
from retinal oedema no form of retinopathy occurs. 

Sufferers firom chronic nephrosis are unusually susceptible 
to intercurrent infections, and these constitute the chief danger 
to life. Pneumococcal infections axe the most common, and 
death from pneumococcal j^eritonitis is frequent, especially in 
children. In older subjects, streptococcal infections are 
relatively more common than in children. Erysipelas may 
occur, spread rapidly, and prove fatal. 

It is doubtful whether chronic hpoid nephrosis differs from 
chronic simple nephrosis except in degree. The comparatively few 
well-authenticated cases described mainly indicate an even more 
clironic and severe form of the latter disease. All the signs and 
sjTnptoms, but especially the lipoid changes in the blood, urine, 
and kidneys, are more pronounced, of longer duration, and are 
less subject to spontaneous remissions or amenable to treatment. 

Diagnosis. — The chief difficulty in diagnosis is to differentiate 
chronic nephrosis from the nephrotic stage of chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis. In some cases this can be done where there is a 
definite history of an attack of acute nephritis, or gross 
hsematuria following a sore throat or scarlet fever, but in many 
the distinction cannot be made. The subsequent appearance of 
hypertension, or azotemia may, of course, determine the 
diagnosis. From amyloid nejihrosis the diagnosis may again 
prove difficult or impossible. A history of long-continued l>one 
sepsis or tuberculosis may help, and enlargement of the kidneys, 
liver, and spleen suggest a diagnosis of amyloid disease. When 
there is only moderate generalised cedema the clinical appear- 
ance may simulate myx^ema. 

Prognosis. — ^The disease, if not out short by intercurrent 
infections, normally runs a very prolonged course, with periods 
of montlis or years of remissions and exacerbations. Borne 
patients, especially children, recover completely, but on the 
whole the prognosis is not good. 

Syphilitic nephrosis is an important variety which occurs 
chiefly during the secondary stage of syphilis, and is character- 



721 


THE NEHHROSES 

ised mainly by gross albuminuria with relatively few or no 
casts, and in Great Britain little or no oedema, though sometimes 
this may be extensive. Many cases respond well to anti-luetic 
treatment, but exceptions occur in wWch non-specific treat- 
ment is more effective. 

Treatment of Chronic Nephrosis and the 
Nephrotic Syndrome 

Diet. — The main indications are for a diet high in protein 
but low in salt and fluid content. In only a minority does a 
high protein diet alone clear up oedema, and then only in the 
mUder cases and especially in children. Often, too, it does not 
materially increase the protein content of the plasma. Protein 
to the extent of 120 to 200 grm. per diem may be given. Foods 
which contain the maximum of protein and the minimum of salt 
should be used, such as eggs, steamed fish, meat, and National 
dried skimmed milk. When oedema is extreme and is causing 
urgent symptoms, it may be wise to rely on the vigorous use of 
diuretics because of their more rapid action, combined with a 
low protein diet. A high protein diet (when first used) retards 
the effect of most diuretics and should be omitted until the bulk 
of the oedema has been removed, when it should always be given. 
The course of chronic nephrosis is so prolonged that a strict salt- 
free diet cannot be maintained throughout. It should only be 
used in conjunction with diuretics, and then that recommended 
for acute nephritis will be found suitable (vule p. 705). At 
other times the salt intake should be restricted to about half 
the normal, which may be achieved by forbidding added salt 
but permitting that ordinarily used in cooking. The fluid 
intake should be mildly restricted to the minimum which can 
l>e taken with comfort. There is great danger in too rigid a 
restriction of fluid, especially in children. Tliirst should not 
be allowed. Generally, between two and three pints per 
twenty-four hours will suffice for adults. 

Medicinal Treatment. — ^The value of diuretics in chronic 
nephrosis has been underestimated, chiefly through insufficient 
experience in their use. The custom of trying one diuretic 
after another in a more or less perfunctory manner is to be 
deprecated. It is as w^ell to remember that many diuretics 
cause a temporary increase of oliguria and oedema before 
diuresis sets in, and that this is not necessarily an indication 
that they are doing harm and should be discontinued but 
rather that they should be employed for longer periods and 
used more vigorously. 

46 



722 RENAL DISEASES 

Diuretics. — Salts . — ^The monovalent kations alone are ab- 
sorbed from the alimentary tract with sufficient readiness 
for general use. Of these, potassium is the most powerful 
diuretic. Sodium should not be employed except as a brake 
on the action of potassium, and to counteract the toxic effects 
of the latter, when used in very large doses. Potassium is 
generally given either as the citrate or chloride, and the former 
is more effective. Multivalent kations, such as calcium, are 
best given by intramuscular injection. Salts which produce 
acidosis, such as ammonium chloride and calcium chloride, may 
be employed. In practice their use is limited ; firstly, because 
they cannot be given in effective doses for a sufficient length 
of time without causing severe gastro-intestinal disturbance, 
and secondly, there is danger of increasing the existing acidosis 
of renal insufficiency when this is present, t.e., in patients in 
the nephrotic stage of chronic glomerulo-nephritis. 

Alkalis . — Potassium citrate, vith the addition of a suitable 
proportion of sodium bicarbonate, is the most generally useful 
diuretic, and the most certain in its action. It may l>e given 
for very long periods, even years, in effective doses, without 
upsetting the gastro-intestinal tract, so that it is of value not 
only for the reduction of oedema but for preventing its recurrence. 
Additional advantages are that a high protein diet may be 
given at the same time, whilst if renal function is nonnal it 
is non-toxic. When renal function is impaired the danger of 
alkalosis arises, and potassium citrate in large doses should not 
be given unless facilities for immediate blood analyses are at 
hand. Very large doses may l>e required, up to 1,000 gr. or 
more per twenty-four hours. The amount given must bo 
varied from time to time to suit changing conditions. 

Urea is a safe and simple diuretic in doses of 15 gim. by 
mouth, tlirice daily. It is uncertain in its action, has to be 
continued for long periods, confers no protection against 
recurrence, and is effective in comparativ^ely few cases. 

Purine Derivatives. — Caffein, theobromine (as theobromine 
sodium salicylate or diuretin, 10 to 20 gr.), and theophylline 
or theocin (2 to 4 gr.) are occasionally of value in cases of renal 
disease in which the dropsy is mainly due to cardiac failure. 

Mercurial Diuretics . — ^Mersalyl and Neptal are of the greatest 
value in dropsy due to cardiac failure, and are sometimes 
of use as adjuncts in the treatment of nephrosis with alkalis. 
Impairment of renal function, however, is an absolute contra- 
indication to their use. Sudden death occasionally follows 
their administration even when renal function is nonnal. Full 
details as to their administration are given elsewhere {vide p. 666). 



THE NEPHROSES 


723 


Bismuth Salts . — Bismuth sodium ^ tartrate, injected intra- 
muscularly in doses of 0*03 grm., is also a powerful diuretic, 
but again is contraindicated with impaired renal function. 

Thyroid Extract . — ^Thyroid may be given in increasing 
doses up to 15 gr. of the dry extract daily, and even larger 
doses are sometimes required. It is rarely successful when 
used alone, but is said to be occasionally a valuable adjuvant 
to other methods of treatment. 

Parenteral Colloid Administration. — In addition to a high 
protein diet various methods have been tried of increasing 
the colloid osmotic pressure of the blood plasma directly. 
Transfusions of blood and intravenous injections of gum acacia 
(1 grm. per kilo of body- weight of a 30 per cent, solution diluted 
with an equal volume of distilled water, and repeated every 
third or fourth day) may produce a copious, though transitory, 
diuresis. Blood transfusions may, however, induce a fatal 
anuria and should only be used in special circumstances. 
Daily intravenous injections of one or two pints of double, or 
quadruple, strength plasma solution, for about twenty days, 
causes a marked, but temporary, diuresis in some patients. 

Diaphoresis and Purgation . — Both divert fluid from the 
kidneys and cause functional azotaemia. They are also exhaust- 
ing to the patient and should never be employed. 

Decapsulation . — The number of unequivocal examples of 
success resulting from this operation is very small, whilst the 
numerous failures are rarely reported. The operation is now 
rightly falling into disuse. 

Mechanical Drainage . — Drainage of oedema fluid by para- 
centesis or Southey’s tubes should not be undertaken except 
for the immediate relief of urgent symptoms due to pressure, 
or when other measures have failed. There are two dangers 
to be apprehended as a result of this procedure ; first and most 
important, it leads to deviation of fluids from the kidneys and 
causes functional azotemia, which is not uncommonly fatal ; 
and secondly, there is a definite risk of local sepsis and erysipelas 
leading to fatal consequences. The strictest aseptic precautions 
must therefore always be observed. The site of puncture 
is of little consequence provided maximum drainage be secured. 
Fluid should be aspirated from the pleural cavities if the heart 
be displaced or embarrassed. If ascites is causing distress the 
fluid should be withdrawn. If there is possibility of a puimlent 
effusion an exploratory aspiration may be required. In many 
oases mechanical drainage alone fails and is followed by a 
return of the cedema. Sometimes, however, diuretics of all 
kinds fail, and repeated drainage may be the only method 



724 


RENAL DISEASES 


available and sometimes, though rarely, proves permanently 
successful in eradicating the oedema. 

Removal of Foci of Sepsis . — ^There is no evidence that 
operations such as tonsillectomy or drainage of para-nasal 
sinuses are of value in chronic nephrosis. The rule should 
be to avoid interference in these cases unless the treatment 
of the local lesion itself is imperative. 

Amyloid Disease of the Kidney 

Amyloid disease of the kidney is sometimes classified with 
the nephroses because of its clinical resemblance to the latter. 
The essential lesion, however, is a primary degeneration of 
the renal vasculature — the glomerular vessels — the signs and 
symptoms (except in the rare cases of amyloid contracted 
kidney) are exclusively those of a nephrosis, namely, albumin- 
uria and oedema without hypertension or azotsemia. Amyloid 
nephrosis is only foimd in association with long-standing 
suppuration, especially in chronic tuberculous lesions which 
become secondarily infected, pulmonary cavities and bone and 
joint disease, chronic empyema, osteomyelitis, bronchiectasis, 
and pyonephrosis. It may be met with in syphilitic bone 
disease with infected sinuses. Amyloid change is generally 
present in other organs as well, notably the liver and spleen. 
Clinically the chief features are gross albuminuria leading to 
generalised oedema. In rare instances a secondary contraction 
of the kidney develops with impairment of renal function, loss 
of oedema, and even hypertension. The diagnosis is often 
difficult or impossible, on account of the clinical similarity to 
chronic nephrosis. The presence or history of long-continued 
sepsis or tuberculosis, enlargement of the kidneys, liver, or spleen 
may be of value. If 10 to 15 c.c. of a 0*75 to 1-2 per cent, 
solution of Congo red be injected intravenously, 30 per cent, 
of it disappears from the blood in normal persons in one hour, 
but in amyloid diseases and chronic nephrosis 60 per cent, or 
more is removed. In amyloid disease, however, practically 
none of the dye appears in the urine, whereas in nephrosis most 
of it does. Amyloid disease is usually fatal. Instances of 
complete recovery, however, have been recorded. The treat- 
ment is essentially that of the underljdng condition, and the 
administration of a high protein diet which may be supple- 
mented with increasing doses of thyroid extract. Diuretics 
may be tried, but are usually less sucoessful than in chronic 
nephrosis. 



RENAL DISEASES 


725 


PREGNANCY AND RENAL DISEASE 

The renal complications and sequelae of the pregnancy 
toxaemias (pre-eclampsia and eclampsia) are important because 
of their prevalence and high mortality. 

Symptoms. — Briefly the chief symptoms are albuminuria, 
oedema, and h 3 q)ertension, any of which may precede the others 
by days or weeks. Often all appear simultaneously and 
suddenly. Accompanying these cardinal features there may 
be oliguria, headaches, retinal haemorrhages, white patches of 
hyi)ertensive retinopathy, amaurosis, and sometimes detach- 
ment of the retina. Haeniaturia and nitrogen retention do not 
occur except occasionally in the later stages of very severe 
attacks. If improvement does not occur the symptoms in- 
crease and are followed by convulsions and coma — the hall- 
marks of eclampsia. It will be observed that many of the 
symptoms are those of increased intracranial tension. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Some maintain that the often incon- 
spicuous changes in the kidneys are not specific but represent 
abortive and mixed lesions of glomerulo nephritis and nephrosis. 
Others de8cril>e tjq)ical lesions amongst which are hyaline 
droplet and fatty degeneration of the cells of the convoluted 
tubulea and the epithelium of the glomerular tuft, and fairly 
constant thickening of the basement membranes of the tufts. 
Arterial changes are insignificant. The lesions are primarily 
degenerative and the condition has been called glomerulo- 
nephrosis, 

Sequelm. — ^These must be considered under two headings : 
(1) those initiated by pregnancy, and (2) pre-existing renal 
disease complicated by pregnancy. 

1. The form of Bright’s disease W’hich most commonly 
arises from pregnancy toxaemia is a permanent and progressive 
hypertension identical clinically and pathologically with the 
essential hypertension and nephrosclerosis of the non-pregnant. 
It occurs in firom 25 to 50 per cent, of patients surviving the 
acute stages of pregnancy toxaemia. It is more likely to follow 
recurrent toxaemia than a single attack, and the duration of 
the toxaemia is a more potent causal factor than its intensity. 
Persistent hypertension, therefore, more often follows pre- 
eclampsia than eclampsia. 

2. Of pre-existing forms of Bright’s disease, pregnancy is 
most likely to be met w ith in (a) subacute or chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis, and (6) essential hypertension: (i) An existing 
glomerulo-nephritis is generally, but not invariably, made 



726 


RENAL DISEASES 


worse by pregneincy. Also, it greatly increases the chances 
of the pregnancy being complicated by toxaemia. Pregnancy, 
therefore, should not be allowed to occur, or to continue, in 
glomerulo-nephritis. (ii) Wlien pregnancy supervenes in pre- 
existing essential hypertension, the latter is unaffected in 
about half the cases. Pre-existing hypertension, however, 
increases the liability to pregnancy toxaemia about five times. 
Pregnancy toxaemia causes a permanent increase in the hyper- 
tension of a pre-e.xisting hypertension in about 25 per cent, 
of the cases. Pregnancy, therefore, should be avoided in 
essential hypertension. 

Treatment. — It is obviously important (a) to prevent 
toxaemia if possible, and if not to (6) shorten its duration. 
Preventive treatment is either medical or surgical. By far 
the most effective is adequate ante-natal supervision, which 
may with advantage be supplemented by prophylactic alkalin- 
isation, aa describe in scarlatinal nephritis (p. 704). This 
diminishes the incidence of recurrent toxaemia by about 25 per 
cent, if begun at the onset of pregnancy and continued through- 
out. If albuminuria, or other signs of toxaemia, develop in 
spite of these meaisures then strict confinement to bed and a 
low-salt diet should be prescribed as well. The majority clear 
up with this treatment, but if after three weeks there is not 
sufficient improvement, induction of labour must be seriously 
considered. The medicAl treatment of the severer grades 
of toxaemia is essentially that of nephrosis with gross 
oedema and hypertensive encephalopathy — alkalinisation with 
potassium citrate (sodium salts alone are contraindicated), 
low-salt diet and limited fluid intake ; venesection followed 
by lumbar puncture, intravenous hypertonic solutions of 
s^t (30 c.c. of a 30 per cent, solution) or sucrose (100 c.o. 
of a 50 per cent, solution), and the free use of narcotics 
such as chloral, the barbiturates, and morphia, but pre- 
ferably not chloroform. Purgation and diaphoresis are 
contraindicated. 

Bilateral Cortical Necrosu ol the Kidneye.— This is a 
rare condition consisting of extensive infarction and necrosis 
of the renal cortex, believed to l>e due to thrombosis, or 
even spasm, of the interlobar arteries. It is characterised 
by anuria, azotaemia, and renal insufficiency, and some- 
times by hsematuria and hypertension. It is mainly (75 
per cent.) associated with pregnancy and pregnancy toxaemia. 
Recovery is possible, though rare. Treatment is as for 
anuria (p. 695). 



RENAL DISEASES 


727 


THE PRIMARY NEPHROSCLEROSES 

The third and largest group of disorders included in the 
term Bright's disease is that comprising the Primary Nephro- 
scleroses. It consists of three sub-groups : — 

Renal — 

1. Arteriolosclerosis (known clinically as essential 

(benign) hypertension). 

2. (Necrotising) arteriolitis (known clinically as malig- 

nant hypertension). 

3. Arteriosclerosis (which has no clinical significance). 

Whilst malignant hypertension may apparently arise 
sui generis, it often occurs as a terminal complication, or phase, 
in other varieties of renal sclerosis — viz, : chronic glomerulo- 
nephritis, chronic pyelonephritis, and pituitary basophilism. 

Renal arteriolosclerosis and renal arteriolitis together 
constitute the pathological basis of the large group of disorders 
often referred to as cardio -vascular renal disease, which is, 
directly and indirectly, the most common cause of death in 
Great Britain and many other countries. Renal arteriolo- 
sclerosis is, of course, vastly more important numerically than 
renal arteriolitis. General, as distinct from renal, arteriolo- 
sclerosis and arteriosclerosis are described elsewhere {vide p. 576). 

Renal Arteriolosclerosis 

(^^yn. : Kidney of Essential Hypertension ; Primary Granular 
or Red or Sfnall Red Kidney; Chronic Interstitial Nephritis 

{major part opj) 

In all cases of essential hypertension the renal vasculature is 
to some ejttent involved, but only in about 10 per cent, are the 
renal lesions sufficiently pronounced to cause death from renal 
failure. Essential hy|>crtension is mainly a disorder of middle 
and late middle life, the maximum incidence being between 
forty-five and sixty-five years. It is equally common in both 
sexes, 

Etiology , — Renal arteriolosclerosis is a result of long- 
continued hypertension, itself probably due to unknown factors 
which cause a diminution of renal blood flow and liberation 
of renin into the circulation. Contributory factors are heredity, 
obesity, and the stress and strain of life under modern conditions. 
Lead, gout and alcohol, formerly considered potent causes, 
are probably now of little importance. There is no evidence 



728 RENAL DISEASES 

that overindulgence in food (protein) or tobacco is of eetiological 
significance. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^The kidneys vary in size and appear- 
ance from normal to being small, r^, and granular. The capsule 
is adherent and the surface finely granular. There is an excess 
of fat in the pelvic region. On section the organ is hard and 
tough, and the cortex is narrow and not well differentiated 
from the medulla. Small cysts may occur beneath the capsule. 
Histologically the earliest lesion is a tliickening of the intima 
of the afferent arterioles and their parent vessels with fatty 
degeneration and occlusion of the lumen. The corresponding 
glomeruli undergo hyaline and fatty changes, fibrosis and 
atrophy. The tubules atrophy and are replaced by fibrous 
tissue. At first these changes are confined to small localised 
areas separated by larger areas of normal kidney. Later, the 
whole kidney becomes replaced by fibrous tissue, and few 
normal elements remain. Even in this stage death occurs in 
the majority from heart failure and cerebral haemorrhage. 
The remainder die from renal failure and uraemia. Death 
from uraemia may also occur when renal arteriolosclerosis has 
not advanced to this extent but when it has become complicated 
by renal arteriolitis or malignant hj-per tens ion. 

Symptofiiatology , — The symptomatology of renal arteriolo- 
sclerosis (primary granular kidney) is, in the early stages, which 
may be of many years* duration, that of essenti^ hyx)ertenBion 
which is discussed elsewhere {vide p. 580). The only signs and 
symptoms which can be attributed directly to the renal involve- 
ment are (a) changes in the urine, such as mild albuminuria 
and the presence of an increasing number of casts, and (6) the 
usual signs and symptoms of impairment of renal function 
and of renal insufficiency which have been fully described 
above (see Uraemia, p. 690). Compensatory pol}ruria, generally 
evident as nocturia, and one of the earliest and most constant 
signs, is really evidence of impaired renal function. Albuminuria 
is usually shght and may be intermittent. Large quantities 
generally mean either that cardiac failure or the malignant 
phase has supervened. Hyaline, and occasionally granular, 
casts are often present, and again in the malignant stage may be 
abundant. Red blood cells are not found in the “ benign phase. 

Benal Arteriolitis. — This condition is knoi^m clinically as 
Malignant Hypertension {vide p. 582) l)ecause in contrast to 
essential h 3 q)erten 8 ion it tends to run a rapid and inevitably 
fatal course, often of only a few months. It is also apt to 
oc^r in the comparatively young, the age incidence in general 
being some ten years lower than in the essential type. 



THE PRIMARY NEPHROSCLEROSES 


729 


The kidneys are of normal size, slightly granular, of reddish 
colour mottled with yellowish areas and haemorrhages. Micro- 
scopically the essential lesion is a necrosis and endarteritis 
of the afferent and interlobular arterioles. As already indicated, 
these changes are frequently found in association with those 
of other causes of renal sclerosis. Experimental evidence 
suggests that renal arteriolitis is essentially a more intense 
form of renal arteriolosclerosis, differing from the latter in 
degree rather than in kind. 

The main clinical features of malignant hjT)ertension 
{vide p. 582) are those of increased intracranial tension — 
headache, vomiting, amaurosis, papillcedema, convulsions, 
coma, and other manifestations of hypertensive encephalopathy. 
Renal function is grossly impaired and death from uraemia is 
the rule. Albuminuria is marked, red cells are constantly 
present in the urine, and attacks of gross haematuria frequently 
occur. Hyaline and granular casts are numerous. Clinically, 
malignant hypertension presents itself in two forms : either the 
patient, who is often relatively young, is imaware of previous 
hypertension, and attends for the sudden onset of violent 
he^aches, bilious attacks,’' or amaurosis ; or perhaps retinal 
changes are found on routine examination, or similar symptoms 
develop, more or less graduaUy, in one long known to be the 
subject of hypertension. The course in the former group is 
generally more rapid. 

Renal Abtebiosclerosis 

This differs from arteriolosclerosis in affecting the medium 
size vessels only. It is primarily a disease not of the intima 
but of the media, is not accompanied by hypertension, 
unless, as often happens, essential hypertension also is present, 
and it is chiefly a disorder of old age. The kidneys are not 
seriously affected and never sufficiently to give rise to symptoms. 
Renal arteriosclerosis is not therefore a clinical entity. 

Lead Nephritifl in Children. — Nye has described a form of 
chronic nephritis in children which is prevalent in Queensland. 
Clinically it is characterised by persistent hypertension with 
cardiac hypertrophy, hypertensive retinopathy, chronic anaemia, 
and symptoms of uroemia. It appears that lead paint, used on 
the wooden verandah railings of houses, becomes blistered and 
powdery in the sun, and ti^t the children get lead poisoning 
by licki^ the paint off the railings and their fingers. Statistical 
inquiry show^ that nearly aU the victims were habitual 
naU-biteiB. Histologically the lesions principally affected the 



730 


RENAL DISEASES 


renal vaaculatnre. The course is one of progressive destruction 
of renal tissue and death from uraemia. 

Renal Dwarfism (Syn. : Renal Infantilism, Renal Rickets). — 
Renal dwarfism is defined by Barber as “ a condition of stunted 
development, associated with bone deformities of the late 
rickets type, due to an insidious chronic interstitial nephritis 
of obscure aetiolog3^” The sexes are about equaUy affected, 
and it may occur occasionaUy in more than one member of a 
family. The onset is insidious, and it may not be observed 
until six or seven years of age that development is retarded. 
In other cases, evidence of renal insuflBciency may be the first 
manifestation. Genu valgum is usually the most marked bony 
lesion, but the deformities may be widespread. InteUigence is 
unimpaired. The initial lesion appears to be a chronic pro- 
gressive, and possibly congenital, nephritis. Histologically 
the renal lesions are of great variety and complexity. In some, 
typical arteriolosclerotic lesions are present, and in such cases 
hypertension, cardiac h\7)ertrophy, and even retinal changes 
may be found. In others there are various forms of glomeruli tis 
udthout marked primary vascular lesions or hypertension ; 
cardio-vascular changes are, in fact, more often absent than 
not. Long-standing impairment of renal function induces 
increased excretion and diminished absorption of calcium. In 
the attempt to maintain the concentration of calcium in the 
blood at a normal level this substance is withdrawn from the 
soft growing bones with the production of the characteristic 
bony deformities. The prognosis is inevitably hopeless. Death 
from ursemia is the rule, often precipitated by intercurrent 
infection or injudicious operative interference. Most eases 
die at or before pul)erty, but a few have been reported as sur- 
viving to the second or third decade. The treatment is that of 
chronic nephritis. Deformities may be controlled by mechani- 
cal means, but operations under general anaesthesia are to be 
avoided. Ultra-violet radiation aggravates the bony lesions 
and is contraindicated. 

Renal dwarfism is sometimes associated with congenital 
hydronephrosis, chronic pyelonephritis, congenital cystic disease 
of the kidneys, and multiple renal calculi. 


HYDRONEPHROSIS AND PYONEPHROSIS 

Hydronephrosis is an aseptic retention of urine in the 
kidney or renal pelvis due to obstruction to the flow of urine. 
It may be unilateral or bilateral, congenital or acquired. 



HYDRONEPHROSIS AND PYONEPHROSIS 731 

iEtiology. — Congenital hydronephrosis is rare and occurs 
usually in male infants as a result of congenital stenoses and 
septa in the ureter or urethra. It may accompany abnormal 
developments such as horse-shoe kidney, or double ureters, or 
extra-renal anomalies such as spina bifida and imperforate 
anus. Acquired hydronephrosis may be due to (1) Supra-vesical 
causes : calculi within the renal pelvis or ureters, torsions, 
thickenings and kinks at the uretero-pelvic junction, inflamma- 
tory septa and bands from chronic pyelitis, traumatic strictures 
following calculi, growths in the ureter and bladder, and 
compression of the ureter by abdominal tumours, movable 
kidney, aberrant vessels, abdominal adhesions and bands, 
chronic pelvic cellulitis and malignant growths of the cervix 
uteri. (2) Infra-vesical causes : stones or foreign bodies in 
the urethra, strictures of the urethra and prostatic enlargement, 
pelvic tumours, enlargement of uterus, fibroids, ovarian cj^ts 
and growths, and uterine prolapse. Numerically the most 
important of these are impacted calculi, undue mobility of the 
kidney, and aberrant vessels. In not a few oases, however, no 
obvious cause can be found. 

Pathology. — Whatever the cause, unrelieved obstruction, 
partial or intermittent, leads to dilatation of the ureter, pelvis, 
and calyces, and finally atrophy of the pjTamids and cortex 
of the Iddney. Ultimately the kidney is completely destroyed 
and replaced by a sac Ihied by fibrous tissue. A unilateral 
hydronephrosis does not cause renal insufficiency, owing to 
the hypertrophy of the unaffected kidney. A relatively small 
infra - vesical lesion will cause impairment of renal function 
as both kidneys become involved. In the latter, however, 
symptoms will develop more slowdy, as the bladder acts as a 
reservoir wliich prevents serious back-pressure for a considerable 
time. Distended vessels on the inner surfawje of the hydro- 
nephrotic sac may rupture and cause h^ematuria. 

Symptoms and Diagnosis. — In the early stages there may be 
no symptoms. Unilateral hydroneplirosis is more liable to give 
rise to symptoms than the bilateral variety : pain usually 
occurs intermittently and simulates renal colic. There may 
be a continuous dull ache in the loin, vomiting, polyuria, and 
occasionally haematuria. In the later stages a tumour may be 
felt and the patient may be aware of its intermittent appearance. 

Pyelography , — ^The study of renal disease, particularly 
hydronephrosis, tuberculous disease, and growths of the kidney, 
has been greatly facilitated by pyelography. Two method 
are available : (i) Intravenous or excretion pyelography ; in 
this a radio-opaque substance containing iodine is injected 



732 


RENAL DISEASES 


intravenously ; this renders the pelves of the kidneys and 
urinary passages visible by X-rays, (ii) Retrograde pyelography ; 
in this method sodium iodide is injected by ureteric catheter. 

By one or both of these methods it is possible to detect 
early changes in the size or shape of the renal pelvis. In early 
hydronephrosis characteristic flattening or “ clubbing ” of the 
calyces can be readily detected. 

Numerous proprietary drugs for intravenous pyelography are 
available, such as Pyelectan (Glaxo), Uropac (May & Baker), 
Uroselectan B (Schering), and Per-Abrodil (Bayer). The failure 
of a kidney to secrete the drug indicates impairment of function 
(nide p. 679). The only contraindications to the use of these 
drugs are severe kidney (azotaemia) and liver disease, and very 
acute inflammatory lesions of the urinary tract. 

Prognosis. — ^The prognosis varies witii the cause and the 
completeness with which it can be removed. The chief danger, 
apart from gradual destruction of the kidneys, is that the sac 
may become infected and result in a pyonephrosis. 

Treatment. — The treatment is entirely surgical. 

Pyonephrosis. — Pyonephrosis is a distension of the renal 
pelvis with pus. It arises as a sequel of pyelitis, or from infection 
of a hj'dronephrosis. Renal calculi are the commonest cause. 
Tuberculous pyonephrosis is a not uncommon complication of 
tuberculous kidney (vide p. 13H). The symptoms in the early 
stages of pyonephrosis are those of hydronephrosis, and the 
onset of infection is ushered in by pjTexia and rigors. The 
treatment consists of nephrectomy provided the function of 
the other kidney permits. The treatment of bilateral cases is 
purely palliative. 


BACILLUS COLI mFECTIONS 

Bacillus coli communis (B.C.C.) may appear in the urine 
mthout causing constitutional symptoms, a (condition known as 
bacilluria. When coli bacilluria is accompanied by pyuria 
inflammation ot some part of the urinary tract has occurred* 
If the inflammation is confined to the renaJ pelvis the condition 
is known as pyelitis, and if to the bladder cystitis. 

Acute B.C.C. Pyelitis* — B. coli are the infecting orgaiusms 
in the great majority of cases of acute pyelitis, the remainder 
usually Ijeing due U> streptococcal and staphylococcal infections. 
In the majority the path of infection is believed to be by 
the blood stream, but in some it is apparently an ascending 
infection from the bladder^ either directly or through the 



BACILLUS COLI INFECTIONS 733 

peri-ureteral lymphatics. Whatever the path of infection, its 
location in the renal pelvis is determined by certain factors, of 
which local trauma, either from external injury, or internal 
injury from a calculus, obstruction to the urinary flow, and 
lowered resistance of the patient to infection in general, are 
the most important. 

Pathology , — The local lesion consists of an acute inflammation 
of the mucosa and submucosa of the renal pelvis, which in 
chronic cases leads to ulceration and scarring, with consequent 
deformities. 

Symptoms , — The symptoms of acute pyelitis are those of an 
acute bacteriaemia, together with those of inflammation of some 
part of the urinary tract accompanied by bacilluria or pyuria. 
There may be a short prodromal stage with malaise, headache, 
anorexia, constipation, and perhaps frequency of micturition. 
In this stage the urine may contain only traces of albumen, a 
few leucocjiies, and growth of B.C.C. is scanty. It is important 
to note that in the first few da 38 it may not be possible to 
establish the diagnosis from examinations of the urine. The 
onset of the acute stage is sudden w ith great frequency, half- or 
quarter-hourly, strangurj^ abdominal pain, tenderness, and 
pseudo-rigidity. The temperature rises to 103^ or 104^, and 
there may be rigors. In some cases there is frank haematuria. 
Generally the urine is scanty, highly coloured with a very acid 
reaction, turbid or opalescent, and has a characteristic “ fishy 
odour. Constipation is present and there may be frequent 
vomiting. Later the pain becomes localised to one loin and 
is often of a dull, aching character. Headache may be a 
prominent symptom, and toxic delirium and even coma may 
occur. The patient is flushed, and the tongue is dry and 
coated. Careful palpation may show that the affected kidney 
is enlarged and tender. There is a marked leucocytosis during 
the stage in which there is not much pus in the urine. When 
pyuria becomes abundant the leucGcjiAisis decreases. Blood 
cultures are frequently positive in the earlier stages. In some 
the symptoms are chiefly those of cystitis, although the 
bladder may have been secondarily infected from the renal 
pelvis. With cystitis there is usuallj^ much mucus in the urine. 

Course , — The course is very variable. The acute stage may 
subside in a few days or weeks. The temperature falls by lysis 
and the local symptoms disappear. In most cases baciUuria 
and pyuria persist in microscopical amounts for months after 
the actual s3anptoms have subsided. Recurrences are not 
uncommon a^r complete recovery and are usually precipitated 
by intercurront infections, suoli as catarrhal colds or influenza, 



734 


RENAL DISEASES 


or by injudicious purgation. In severe cases the infection may 
spre^ and involve the renal parenchyma, a condition known 
as pyelonephritis or surgical kidney. Pyelitis in children 
occurs most commonly under two years of age, and almost 
exclusively in females. The constitutional symptoms are 
frequently very marked and out of proportion to the urinary 
signs. The disorder may begin as a gastro-intestinal disturb- 
ance, or may closely simulate appendicitis or meningitis. It 
is one of the rare causes of rigors in children under two years 
of age, a fact which may be of some diagnostic importance. 

Differential Duiffnosis , — In the early stages with minimal 
urinary signs the malaise and pyrexia may simulate influenza, 
and t^ persistent headache, typhoid. When the abdominal 
signs are marked, differentiation from an acute abdomen, t.c., 
appendicitis, peritonitis, cholecystitis or salpingitis, may be 
difficult. A careful and lepeated examination of the urine will 
generally lead to a correct diagnosis, though this may not be 
possible for a few days. 

Chkonic Pyelitis 

Chronic B.C.C. PN^eUtis is usually a residual infection of the 
renal {)elvd8, following an acute attack, and may jKjrsist for 
months or years or may l>e permanent. It may be quiescent 
or responsible for repeated acute attacks of pyelitis or cystitis. 
Sometimes the sjmptoms of [)elvic infection are absent, though 
this is the cause of a persistent cystitis. The symptoms may 
be general or local. Of the general symptoms, undue fatigue, 
headache, pain in the back, digestive disturbances, and 
symptoms of neurasthenia are the most common. The cliief 
local symptoms are frequency of micturition, or urgency, and 
pain in the loin or region of the bladder. It is im|H)rtant to 
remember that bacilluria may persist indefinitely without 
symptoms of any kind and may l>c quite innocuous. C<>nstipa- 
tion is a predisposing cause of acute exacerbations of [myelitis 
in those with chronic bacilluria, but more frequently they are 
caused by the injudicious use of purges, ( -hronic pyelitis may 
give rise to pyonephrosis. 

Treatment. — T^ fiiBt essential is to ensure that the pyelitis 
is a primary disorder and not a complication of some underlying 
condition, such as a calculus. Strict confinement to bed is 
imperative in the early stages. The diet can be left to the 
wishes of the patient. Large quantities of fluids (not less than 
6 pints per twenty-four houiv), such as water, barley water, 
Contrexeville, or milk, should be given. Purges should nev^ 



BACILLUS COLI INFECTIONS 


735 


be employed, as loose stools are oontraindioated. The bowels 
may be kept open by lubricants such as parafi&n, or simple 
enemata. The chief object of treatment is to maintain a large 
output of alkaline urine. Pus and organisms are literally washed 
out with the diuresis, and the growth of the latter is inhibited 
by the alkalinity of the urine. Alkalis must therefore bo given 
by mouth, in doses large enough to render the early morning 
specimens of urine (the most acid of the twenty-four hours) per- 
sistently and definitely alkaline (pH = above 7*6) until all signs 
of inflammation have cleared, i.e., usually for at least several 
weeks. As a rule, the pyrexia, pain, and tenderness subside 
within forty-eight hours of the urine becoming definitely 
alkaline, but return at once if the degree of alkalinity be allowed 
to diminish. The beneficial results of alkali therapy, when 
adequate doses are given, are so consistent and striking that 
other treatment is rarely called for, and indeed failure to respond 
generally means either that the original diagnosis was wrong, 
or that the condition is associated with mechanical obstruction 
in the urinary passages. In such cases further investigation 
by means of cystoscopy and ureteric catheterisation should 
not be delayed. Alkalis should be given as a mixture of equal 
parts of potassium citrate and sodium bicarbonate, 30 to 
60 gr. of each, as many times a day as is found to be necessary 
to obtain and to maintain the required degree of alkalinity of 
the urine. The latter can be readily estimated daily (if necessary 
by the patient) in a very few moments, by noting the colour 
of the urine after the addition of a few droi)8 of a 0*1 per cent, 
solution of brom-thjTtnol-blue, and comparing this with a 
standard indicator.* As a rule some 400 to 600 gr. of alkali 
per twenty -four hours will suffice, but even larger doses may be 
required, especially at the outset. As renal function is unaffected, 
no danger firom ^kalosis need be apprehended. Tincture of 
hyoscyamus (30 to 60 minims) may be added to the mixture as 
an antispasmodic if required. Alkali treatment must not be 
relaxed, until by trial it is shown that a reduction of dosage 
is not followed by a return of pus or bacilli in the uruie or of 
constitutional symptoms. In some coses it is necessary to 
continue treatment for months or years to prevent relapses. 
Alkalis will not, of course, be successful if mech^cal obstruction 
to the flow of urine be present, as in the later stages of pregnancy. 
In such circumstances, and when it is not possible or desirable 
to deal immediately with the obstruction, other methods are 
indicated. It has been found that gi^wth of B.C.C. in the 

♦ The ** B.D.H.” Capillator, supplied by the British Drug Houses Ltd., is a 
oonvonieut form of apparatus for the purpose. 



736 RENAL DISEASES 

urinary tract can be readily and often completely inhibited 
when the urine is rendered sufficiently acid, especially in the 
presence of certain of the ketone bodies. For this reason the 
ketogenic diet was introduced for the treatment of B.C.C. 
pyelitis. As, however, the effective degree of acidity is very 
high, it was necessary to supplement the diet, which was itself 
extremely unpleasant, by a rigid curtailment of the fluid intake 
in order to induce a sufficient concentration of “ acid in the 
urine. These conditions could often only be maintained 
sufficiently long to produce a temporary cure so that the relapse 
rate was high. Pleasanter and much more effective is mandelic 
acid (Rosenheim), a substance related to the active principle 
(B-hydroxybutyric acid) of the ketogenic diet. Mandelic acid 
is given by mouth in doses of 3 grm. four times daily with 
ammonium chloride (15 gr.) to provide the optimum urinary 
acidity (pH 5-3). They are sometimes combined and given 
as ammonium mandelate (3 grm. three or four times daily). 
The fluid intake is restricted to less than 2 pints per twenty-four 
hours. Very encouraging results have been obtained but, 
chiefly because the treatment cannot be continued for sufficiently 
long periods without causing severe gastro-intestinal dis- 
turbances or damaging the kidneys, the relapse rate is again 
high. Itecentlj” sulphamlamide and sulphapyridine have been 
found to give the most remarkable results in B.C.C. infections 
of the renal pelvis, whilst sulphathiazole is particularly effective 
in infections of the urinary tract with staphylococci and strep- 
tococcus ficcalis. Details regarding administration of the 
siilphonamide group of drugs are given on page 6. In urinary 
infections the dosage in adults should usually be a total of 
3 to 5 grm. per diem, and the course should last at least seven 
days. No dietary or fluid restrictions need be imposed as it 
is effective within a wide range of urinary reactions (pH 5-2 
to 6*8). There is evidence that sulphonamides are even more 
effective when given in conjunction with alkalis. They are 
particularly valuable in children and during pregnancy. In 
chronic pyelitis, after a thorough search has been made for 
mechanical causes of chronicity, such as impacted calculi, 
anatomical deformities due to scarring of the calyces and pelvis, 
etc., sulphonamides should always be tried first and, if they fail, 
mandelic acid. Various so-called urinary antiseptics, hexamine, 
hexyl resorcinol, and numerous other sulistances are frequently 
employed, but the results are usually disappointing. Auto- 
genous vaccines have long been in vogue, but their value has 
certainly not yet been established. It must be admitted that 
the treatment of chronic B.C.C. pyelitis is often unsuccessful. 



RENAL DISEASES 


737 


PERINEPHRIC ABSCESS 

Perinephric abscess is a condition due to the formation of 
an abscess in the perinephric tissues, either as a result of a 
hffimatogenoxis infection from a distant focus, or more rarely 
by direct infection from the kidney or neighbouring structures, 
llie infecting organism is nearly always the Staphylococcus 
pyogenes aureus. 

jEtiology. — Perinephric abscess may result from direct injury 
to the loin, or from staphylococcal skin infections — carbuncle, 
furuncle, or sycosis. The interval between the primary infection 
and the perinephric suppuration is usually ^m two to four 
weeks, but may be as many months. It is occasionally due to 
streptococcal or pneumococcal infectious, and may follow 
ton^dlitis, acute infectious diseases, and influenza. 

Pathology. — ^The initial lesion is believed to be in the cortex 
of the kidney, in the form of minute abscesses which penetrate 
the renal capsule and so reach the perinephric tissues. Pus 
accumulates behind the kidney and may point in the loin, 
or it may travel down the psoas muscle to the groin or pelvis ; 
it may rupture through the diaphragm, enter the peritoneal 
cavity or the intestines, or by lymphatic spread infect the 
pleural cavities and cause empyema. 

Symptoms. — ^The onset is usually insidious, with vague 
symptoms of fatigue, malaise, and pvTexia. Localising signs 
in the form of lumbago, pains in the loins or back, hip or th^h 
may not appear for two, three, or many weeks. A limp may be 
the first obvious sign. Tenderness in, and bulging of, the 
posterior renal angle are important signs. There may also be 
thickening and induration of the skin in the loin. As the con- 
dition progresses, signs of toxaemia develop ; pallor, sweatings, 
high “ septic ” temperatures, with or without rigors, occur, and 
the leucocyte coimt increases to 20-40,000 per o.mm. There 
may be diminution of the breath sounds, and dullness on 
percussion over the base of the lung on the affected side. The 
diagnosis is confirmed by an exploratory puncture into the 
tumour. The urine is usually normad, but may contain a 
trace of albumen and a few leucocytes. Some cases of what 
appears to be perinephric suppuration rmdergo spontaneous 
resolution. 

Diagnosis. — In the ea^ly stages, lumbago, hip-joint disease, 
rheumatism, and soiatioa may all be simulated. In the pyrexial 
stage the diagnosis from influenza, typhoid, septicaBmia, 
tub^ulosis, and infective endocarditis mav be < 



738 RENAL DISEASES 

Treatment. — The txeatment consists in evacuating the pus 
by incision, but this should not be done until the suppuration 
is “ ripe.” If the temperature and suppuration oontinue after 
operation a renal oubunde should be suspected. The prognosis 
is good in the vast majority of oases adequately treats. 

Renal Carbuncle. — ^This is a oiroumsoribed abscess of the 
cortex of the kidney, consisting of a fusion of a number of smalier 
abscesses separated by a zone of granulation tissue from the 
rest of the kidney. It is usually unilateral and is due to a 
hsematogenous infection by the Staphylococcua pyogenes awreus. 
.^tiologically it is aiTnilar to perinephric abscess and usually 
follows furunculosis. The clinical signs are those of perinephric 
abscess, and the diagnosis cannot usually be made before 
operation. 


NEW GROWTHS 

New growths of the kidney may be classified as : — 

(a) Innocent tumours ; lipomata, fibromata, adenomata, 

angiomata. 

(b) Mali^ant tumours : hypemejhxomata, caxoinomata, 

saroomata. 

In addition there are new growths of the renal pdvis : innooent 
tumours — papillomata ; and malignant tumours — oaroinomata. 
Innooent tumours of the kidney aie relatively rare, the 
adenomata being the most common. Most malignant tumours 
of the kidney are primary and the commonest is the hyper- 
nephroma originally described in 1883 by Grawite and still 
known by his name. It was thought by him to be a suprarenal 
rest, but is now considered to be eithw a malignant adnuuna 
of the kidney or possibly a carcinoma of the renal tnbulee. 
It may occur at any age, and begins as a solid tumour of the 
upper pole of the kidney which later undergoes cystic degenera- 
tion with areas of necrosis and hemorrhages. Mioroeoopically 
it resembles portions of the adrenal cortex. Metastases occur 
via the bkx^ stream and involve the lungs, long bones, 
vertebrae, bones of the skull, or indeed almost any organ of the 
body. The secondary deposits may first draw attention to the 
conation. In the lungs a large cdroular opacity resembUng a 
cannon-ball may be seen on X-ray examination. Saroomata 
usually occur in diildien under five years of age and are 
therefore thought to be congenital in origin. 

WgP i and Symptoms. — In children the first sign is usually 
a progressive enlargement of the abdomen, pallor, loos of wsii^t, 



RENAL CALCULUS 739 

or pressure oausing obstinate constipation ; haematuxia is 
comparatively rare. The most ficequent form of new growth 
is a congenital sarcoma. The prognosis is extremely bad, 
though nephrectomy should be performed without delay in 
tib.e absence of obvious seconds]^ deposits. In admits the 
cardinal symptoms of malignant growths are hsematuria, pain, 
and loss of weight. Hsematuria is generally the earliest sign, 
and is present in over 75 per cent, of cases at some stage. Pain 
may be intense or merely a dull ache in the back or loin. Renal 
colic may be simulated by the passage of clots of blood down 
the ureters. The sudden appearance of a varicocele on the 
left side may be mi initial symptom, as the left spermatic vein 
enters the left renal vein. The treatment of all forms of renal 
new growths is purely surgical. In connection with this 
subject it may be pertinent to mention two important rules of 
nephrology : (a) the most common cause of hsmiaturia in 
children is some form of glomerulo-nephritiB ; in adults over 
middle age, malignant growths ; and (6) hsmaturia in an adult 
should arouse suspicion of a malignant growth until this 
diagnosis has been disproved. 


RENAL CALCULUS 

Renal calculi consist of various crystalline or amorphous 
urinary constituents bound into a mass by a cementing sub- 
stance. Among the factors believed to contribute to their 
formation are the presence of an organic nucleus, stagnation 
of the urine, alterations in its colloid content, and massive 
excretion of calcium as in parathyroid tumours, vitamin D 
excess and bone disease. In size calculi vary from minute 
concretions to large single or multiple stones. In rather more 
than 10 per cent, of cases they are found in both kidneys. 
Most calculi are of mixed composition, but pure stones may 
occur. Uric acid, calcium ox^ate, c^cium phosphate, and 
ammonio-magnesium phosphate fuo the commonest varieties. 
Calcium carlmnate, cystin, and xanthin stones are also met 
with. Although oxaluria may accompany calcium oxalate 
calculi it often occurs independently, following the ingestion 
of such vegetables as rhubarb, spinach, strawberries and toma- 
toes, or it may occur in patients with achlorhydria and gastric 
fermentation. Renal calculi occur at all ages but are most 
common in young male adults. 

Symptonui, — ^Pain, usually lumbar, is by &r the most 
frequent initial symptom. It may be sharp, or a dull ache 



740 


RENAL DISEASES 


mtermitient or oontinuous, and in not a few oases may be 
referred to the region of the unaffected kidney. The attacks 
of pain may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting. On 
miorosoopioal examination of the urine, blood and pus are 
frequently foxmd. In some cases there sue definite attsMsks of 
gross hsematuria. When calculi are passing down the ureters, 
attsicks of the most excruciating psdn may occur, assodated 
with vomiting ; these attacks are typical and are referred to 
as renal colic. The psdn ususdiy stsirts in the loin or kidney 
region, and shoots down to the groin or testicle in the most 
agonising spasms. The patient is doubled up with psdn, which 
may continue, with short intermissions, for several hours, 
unless morphia be given. The pain then diminishes suid passes 
off, generally to recur some wee^ or months later. Cessation of 
the pain does not necessarily mean that the stone has passed into 
the blsulder, but more often that fatigue of the musculsu wsdl of the 
ureters has set in. Hsematuria commonly ooo\irs after an attack 
of renal colic. Bilateral renal calculi may cause destruction of 
the renal tissue and so give rise to ursemia ; other complications 
are pyelitis, pyelonephritis, hydro- and pyo-nephrosis. 

Diagnosis. — The t3^ical nature and distribution of the pain, 
together with blood and pus in the urine, renders the diagnosis 
in many cases eas}’. In others the symptoms are less typical 
and may give rise to confusion with numerous disorders, the 
most common of which are — appendicitis, intestinal obstruction, 
sacro-iliac disease, lumbago, gall-stones, tabetic crises, or other 
renal disorders. Radiology, o3^8toeoopy, and urography are 
invaluable aids to diagnosis. 

Treatment. — It is important to remember that most stones 
are passed spontaneously. The pain of renal colic may be 
relieved by hot baths or the local application of hot poultices 
or hot water bottles to the loins. Copious drinks of hot 
lemonade, barley water, or weak tea are also of value. If these 
measures do not suffice, morphia — | gr. with or without 
gr- atropine — should always be given and repeated if 
necessary. Inhalations of chloroform may be used until the 
morphia takes effect. Between attacks, the patient should lead 
a quiet life, avoiding sudden exertion of any kind, and drinking 
freely of mineral waters, to which either the citrate or bicarbonate 
of potash may be added. The radical treatment of stones which 
are not passed spontaneously, and are either causing persistent 
distress or infection of and damage to the kidney, is surgical 
removal though occasional success is claimed for the intra- 
ureteric injection of acid and alkaline solvent solutions in 
appropriate droumstanoes. 



POLYCYSTIC KIDNEYS 


741 


Decabitiu Oalcoli. — Long-continned immobilisation on the 
back on a level bed or frame, as in the treatment of tubercu- 
losis of the spine, or in severe rheumatiod arthritis, causes 
urinary stagnation and increases the tendency to form renal 
calculi. This can be prevented by giving ample fluids by mouth 
and changing the inclination of the bed through both axes every 
few hours. 


POLYCYSTIC KIDNEYS 

This is a comparatively common congenital abnormality 
occuiring in about 1 in 600 autopsies. It is usually bilateral, 
though generally one kidney is more affected than the other. 
It is often fft Tnili n.1. Death usually occurs either in early 
childhood or in middle life. The liver and pancreas are also 
sometimes the seat of a similar cystic degeneration. The cysts 
vary in size and number, but eventually destroy the normal 
kidney tissue and lead to death from ursemia. The disease 
generally remains latent, though infrequent attacks of hsematuria 
may le^ to the discovery of enlarged kidneys. Signs and 
symptoms of renal insufficiency appear very slowly, and in 
no other condition is a high blood urea known to persist so 
long, sometimes for several years, without other signs of renal 
failure. The blood pressure tends to increase in the later stages. 
The diagnosis rests on the history of attacks of hsematuria 
and the presence of enlarged kidneys, and especially upon 
the rather characteristic pyelographic appearances. The 
prognosis is ultimately extremely bad, and there is no treat- 
ment other than efforts to maintain a state of compensation 
for impaired renal function for as long a period as possible, 
and to observe extra care in avoiding exposure and chills. 

A. A. Osman. 



AFFECTIONS OF THE JOINTS 
AND BONES 


ARTHRITIS 

T he problem of evolving a satisfactory classification of 
arthritis is one which is not likely to ^ solved until we 
acquire a more complete knowledge of the aetiology of 
the condition. At the present time it is perhaps best to adopt 
the provisional classification of so-called rheumatic diseases, 
suggested by the British Committee on Chronic Kheumatio 
Diseases. ITiis is given below : 

Group 1. Rheumatic Fever. Acute or Subacute. 

Group 2. Acute Gout. 

Group 3. Clironic Arthritis. 

A. Rheumatoid type (atrophic ; proliferative). 

(i) Known aetiology (gonococcal, tuberculous, 
syphilitic, dysenteric, etc.). 

(ii) Unknown aetiology (rheumatoid arthritis ; Still’s 
disease). 

B. Osteo-arthritic type (hypertrophic or degenerative ; 
climacteric). 

Group 4. Non-articular Rheumatio Affections. 

Rheumatic Fever and Gout have been described elsewhere. 
Under the heading of arthritis of rheumatoid type of known 
setiology are included many cases in which the primary origin 
of the arthritis is obvious. Thus not uncommonly in association 
with an acute local infection, particularly tonsillitis, there may 
occmr an arthritis, involving one or more joints which rapidly 
become hot, swollen, and extremely tender. The joint cavity 
contains a turbid fluid, which does not, however, often progress 
to suppuration. The patient is usually severely ill and pyrexial. 
With immobilisation and rest of the affected joints the symptoms 
gradually subside, but there may be residual stiflbess and 
limitation of movement for long periods. Such types of arthritis, 

742 



OSTEO-ARTHRinS 


743 


whether eeoondary to streptococcal, gonococcal, or other types 
of infection, may reasonably be termed infective arthritis. 
Sulphonamides are of value in this type of arthritis. 

When, however, all cases of arthritis of known origin are 
excluded, there remains a very large group where artl^tis is 
the most prominent, though not necessarily the only manifesta- 
tion of disease. IVo very frequently encounter^ types of 
arthritis fall under this heading, and are known as rheumatoid 
and osteo-arthritis ; and, in addition, allied probably to 
rheumatoid arthritis, there are two relatively imcommon 
varieties, Still’s disease and ankylosing spondylitis. Although 
in rheumatoid arthritis osteo-arthritic changes may eventually 
supervene, the two conditions are completely different as 
regards their age and sex incidence, aetiology, and clinical 
manifestations, and they accordingly are described separately. 


OSTEOARTHRITIS 

Some degree of osteo-arthritis, particularly in the larger 
jc^ts, is present in practically 100 per cent, of persons over 
the age of fifty. Fortunately it often causes little or no disability. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Osteo-arthritis may affect any joint, but 
it is most commonly encountered in the spine, the knees, hips, 
elbows, and acromio-clavicular joints. The shoulders are less 
firequently involved. The condition may sometimes involve 
only a single joint, but more often several are affected, though 
with varying degrees of severity. The primary changes are 
erosion and destruction of the cartilage, particularly at pressure 
points, and a thickening of the sub-chondral bone due either 
to compression or new formation. In advanced osteo-arthritis 
there is complete destruction of the articular surfaces, and where 
the bones come in contact they show a dense, hard surface 
described as ebumation. In ad^tion, around the edges of the 
joint there are bony projections termed osteophytes. The 
synovial membrane is only involved secondarily. 

Mtiology. — Osteo-arthritis is not a systemic disease with 
secondary joint manifestations but a primary disease of the 
joints themselves. Trauma is a frequent cause, and injuries 
even in relatively early life may many years later prrauce 
severe osteo-arthritis. The incidence of the disease increases 
with age and the changes are almost certainly due to **wear 
and tear ’’ of the articular surfaces. Focal infection probaUy 
plays no part in the production of the disease. Abnormal 
strain on joints product by faulty posture ultimately results 



744 AFFECTIONS OF THE JOINTS AND BONES 

in osteo-arthritic changes. Considerable overweight also 
predisposes to osteo arthritis, particularly of the knee joints. 

Symptoms. — These will depend on the joints involved. 
Disability is usually greatest when the hip joint is affected. 

On physical examination movement is often hmited owing 
to the disorganisation of the joint, the presence of osteophytes, 
and the thickening of the capsule. Marked crepitus can be 
felt, due to erosion of the articular cartilage. Osteophytes may 
be palpable as small, hard projections around the edges of the 
joint. Pain is a very variable featiire ; sometimes when there 
is marked crepitus, joint movement is but httle impaired and 
is practically free from pain. Patients with osteo-arthritis often 
find that their pain is much aggravated in cold and wet weather, 
and is relieved by warmth. The blood sedimentation rate is 
within normal limits and there is no anaemia . The general 
health is unimpaired. 

Treatment. — From the nature of the disease cure is obviously 
impossible, but in severe cases considerable relief may be 
obtained by the use of surgical appliances such as cali[)er 
splints, which help to relieve pressure on joints, such (us the knee 
or hip. Deep X-ray treatment is sometimes helpful, or in very 
severe disease of the hip joint, excision of the joint and 
ankylosis may relieve the pain. When the knees are chiefly 
involved, if the patient can lose a considerable amount of 
weight there is less strain on the joints. Sometimes mani- 
pulation under an anaesthetic is helpful. Aspirin is, j)erhaj)8, 
the most useful drug for the relief of pain, and its continued 
use even in large doses, rarely produces unpleasant symptoms. 
Diathermy and physiotherapy are often of great assistance. 

Climacteric Arthritis. — At or about the period of the 
menopause it is not uncommon for arthritis to develop, affe(‘ting 
principally the knees. These become stiff and painful, and on 
examination are found to be enlarged, due to proliferation of 
the 83 uiovial membrane and thickening of the f>eriarticular 
tissues. The patients are usually much overweight and show 
evidence of hypothjToidism. If the weight can bo reduced 
by vigorous dieting the condition improves. Thyroid extract 
also appears to be helpful, but this may l>e due merely 
to its influence in producing a loss of weight. Sometimes the 
arthritis disappears when the menopause is past, but it may 
ultimately progress to osteo-arthritis. Oestrogenif: therapy 
{vide p. 2hH) is also said to give good results. The joints should 
be 8upfK)rted by .some form of elastic bandage. Massage 
and.diathermyjmay also^be tried. 

At about the same period nodular swellings at the bases 



RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 


745 


of the terminal phalanges are often found. These are known 
as Heberden's nodes. Initially the swelling is periarticular but 
eventually osteo -arthritis may develop. The condition is seen 
occasionally in association with generalised osteo-arthritis, or 
rarely in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. More frequently 
it occurs in the absence of any form of arthritis elsewhere. 


RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 

This type of arthritis is sometimes also known as atrophic 
or infective artliritis. The disease affects mainly females, the 
proportion being about seven females to one male, and it is 
most common between tw'enty and forty. This is in striking 
contrast with osteo-arthritis, in wlxich males are more often 
affected, and the incidence increases with advancing years. 

Morbid Anatomy. — In rheumatoid arthritis any joint may 
be affected, but those most constantly involved are the small 
joints of the hands and feet, more j)articularly the proximal 
interphalangeal joints. 

The disease b('gins in the synovial membrane and peri- 
articular tissues, wliich become thickened and proliferated, and 
on microscopical examination show infiltration with Ijunphocytes 
and phisma cells. Later the proliferated synovial membrane 
becomes adlierent to the articular cartilage, wliich may be 
destroyed. The underljing bone becomes atrophied, and in 
the later stages there may be subluxation and sometimes 
fibrous ankylosis, which, however, very rarely becomes a bony 
union. Even early in the disease there is striking wasting of 
the muscles surrounding an affected joint. In the fingers this 
produces the characteristic spindle-shaped deformity. 

iEtiology. — In spite of an enormous amount of research 
the problem of the aetiology of rheumatoid arthritis remains 
unsolved. It certainly is not due to trauma, though somethnes 
osteo-arthritic changes may occur in a patient with rheumatoid 
arthritis. By many the disease is considered to be due to focal 
infection, the site of the primary infection being thought to 
be variously in infected teeth, tonsils, sinuses, gall-bladder, 
appendix, urinary or genital tract. By some it is maintained 
that rheumatoid arthritis is due to intestinal toxaemia. 

There are many features in rheumatoid arthritis which 
suggest that the disease is infective in origin. Among these 
are pyrexia, tachycardia, moderate leucoo3rtosis, increiised 
sedimentation rate, and evidence of general ill-health, such 
as anaemia. Moreover, histological examination of synovial 



746 AFFECTIONS OF THE JOINTS AND BONES 

membrane and periarticular tissues show changes resembling 
those seen in inflammatory conditions. Further, positive 
agglutination and precipitin reactions to haiinolytic streptococci 
are often found in the serum of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. 

If the disease is due to a local focus of infection there are 
three possible explanations for the development of arthritis : 
(1) that micro-organisms actually migrate from the focus to 
the joints, in other words, that the arthritis is metastatic in 
origin ; (2) that toxins formed in the focus of infection are 
absorbed and produce secondary changes in the joints ; (3) 
that the presence of an infective focus produces a “ sensi- 
tisation ” of the tissues, and that rheumatoid artliritis is 
comparable with allergic manifestations, such as the joint 
conditions sometimes seen in serum reactions. None of these 
explanations can be regarded as wholly satishictorv. It is 
certain that the arthritis is not metastatic and bacteria are 
very rarely found in either the blood or the joints of rhcuiraatoid 
arthritis. In favour of an allergic origin is the fact that a 
considerable proportion of patients with the disease show 
positive skin resections to toxic products derived from haiinolytic 
streptococci. 

If proof of the infective origin of rheumatoid arthritis is 
deficient, there is even less evidence in favour of other 
hjipotheses. Endocrine dysfunction, deficiencies in diet, 
disturbances of the sympathetic nervous systfmi have all been 
suggested as causal factors, but there is little or nothing to 
support any of these view's, except that a ty[H‘ of arthritis 
does occasionally occur at or around the meno])au8e, which is 
sometimes described as climacteric arthritis {vide }). 714). 

In general it may l>e said that, w hatever be the mechanism 
underlying the development of rheumatoid artliritis, gtineral 
ill-health, malnutrition, and unhygienic surroundings j)lay an 
imjx>rtant part as predis}X)8ing factor.^. 

Symptoms of Rheumatoid Arthritis. —These vary consider- 
ably according to the stage of the disease and its severity. 
The onset may be somewhat sudden, oftf*n w'ith pvrexia, but 
in such cases a careful inquiry inUj the history will usually 
elicit the fact that vague joint symptoms, such iis pain and 
stiffness, had been present for some time befonj more acute 
symptfjms developed. Much more friMjuently the onst^t is 
insidious, and it is only after several montlis that the patient 
is compelled to seek medical advice. As with so many other 
chronic diseases, spontaneous remissions, partial or complete, 
are not uncommon. 



RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 


747 


The symptoms and signs may be dealt with most con- 
veniently under two headings, the condition of the joints and 
the general symptoms. 

Joints. — In rheumatoid arthritis any joint may be affected, 
but those most constantly involved are the small joints of the 
hands and feet, more particularly the proximal interphalangeal 
joints. In addition to these, any or all of the larger joints may 
show pathological changes. 

In the earlier stages of the disease the most prominent 
symi)toms are pain and stiffness, and the latter is most marked 
when the patient awakes in the morning. On moving the 
joints the stiffness to a great extent passes off, only, however, 
to recur after a j>eriod of rest. The earbest change is a 
thickening of the periarticular tissues, associated with variable 
amounts of fluid in the joint cavity. In the case of the inter- 
phalangeal joints there is a characteristic sj)in(ile-8haped 
enlargement, which is usually most obvious in the proximal 
joints. The skin over the affected joints is often j)ale, waxy, 
translucent, and shiny. The temperature of the joints is usuaUy 
subnormal, and there is profuse local sweating of the j)alms and 
soles. When larger joints, such as the knees, are affected, 
the joint becomes somewhat swollen, and looks even larger 
than it really is, owing to rajad wasting of the muscles in the 
neighbourhood. During the more acute stages of the disease 
the joints are tender on pressure, and although movement is 
possible, it is painful. When deflnite periarticular thickening 
has occurred the deformity of the joint ])ersists for long periods, 
even though pain and tenderness may have disappeared. 

In the more chronic cases of rheumatoid arthritis there is 
great deformity of the joints ; although bony ankylosis does 
not occur, movement may be quite impossible owing to 
contracture and thickening of the Ugaments. In the hands, 
wrist-drop is common, and ulnar deflection of the fingers is 
characteristic ; similarly, foot-drop may occur. The knees 
show a great tendency to become acutely flexed. 

The synovial membrane is thickened, but the only change 
in the bones is a rarefaction in the neighbourhood of the 
affected joints, which renders them unusually translucent to 
X-rays. In severe and very chronic cases, however, there 
may be erosion of the joint surfaces, associated with subluxation 
and disorganisation of the joints, and fibrous or rarely bony 
ankylosis. 

General Symptoms. — Although the most prominent 
symptoms are referable to the joints, rheumatoid arthritis 
must be regarded in a broader aspect as a general disease. 



748 APFEOriONS OF THE JOINTS AND BONES 

In nearly all oases there is some pyrexia, which, especially 
during the more acute stages, may reach 102° F. or higher. 
The pulse-rate is often persistently raised, even though the 
patient is in bed, but apart from this there is no evidence of 
cardiac involvement. The blood pressure in chronic cases is 
usually low. There is often a moderate secondary anaemia, 
usually with a definite pol>Tnorphonuolear leucocytosis. A 
markedly raised blood sedimentation rate is always found. 
The appetite is poor and the tongue furred. Headache 
and depression are common. Amelioration of the joint 
s^miptoms is usually preceded by an improvement in the 
general health. 

Treatment. — Attention to the general health is of prime 
imi>ortance. The patient should be niirsed in an airy and 
well-lighted room, or even better, on an open veranda. In 
the absence of sunshine ultraviolet light is often beneficial. 
A light diet with an abundance of fresh fruit and green 
vegetables is advisable, and meat should be either avoided 
altogether or strictly limited in amount. The patient must 
be encouraged to take plenty of fluids, such as orange juice or 
lemonade. In addition, wheat germ should be given, as it 
contains much vitamin B, and cod-liver oil is sometimes 
beneficial. Blood transfusion is often recommended, esjx'cially 
in patients with considerable anaemia. 

Focal Infection. --Tho tlu^iuy that rheumatoid arthritis 
was the direct result of focal sepsis had many adherents in the 
years following the last war, and in eonsequenee many patients 
undcTWiuit wholesale extraction f>f t<‘fdh, tonsillectomy, and 
sometimes even more serious o|>erations. Results on th(‘ whole 
were disappointing and at the present tinu* there is general agn'e- 
inent that operations to deal with focal sei>siH should Ik* con- 
fined to those cases where the operation would be regarded 
as ^uivisable, quite apart from the fact that the* patient has 
rheumatoid arthritis. Thus a dead tooth with an apical abscess 
should obviously 1)0 dealt with, but wholesale extractions on 
suspicion are most undesirable. Not more than one or at most 
two tef*th should be extracted at one time, and before any 
(‘xtraction the teeth should lye Hcale<i and the mouth rendere<l 
as clean as possible. 

Treatment with vaccines, whether autogenous or stock, is 
disapfKjinting. Any improvement that results is likely to he^ 
p.sychologiciil. Sulphonamides are ineffective and only jwld to 
the patient s discomfort. 

ProUdn-siiock Therapy . — There is no evidence that this 
fonn of treatment produces any permanent amelioration of 



RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 


749 


8ymptuui.s. Aibificial pyrexia (pyro therapy) carried out in the 
Kettering hypertherm has given favourable results in gonococcal 
artiiritis, but it is doubtful whether it is beneficial in rheumatoid 
arthritis. 

Gold Therapy , — During the last ten years gold therapy 
has become firmly estabhshed as the most effective treatment 
in rheumatoid arthritis. There are numerous proprietary 
gold compounds which are given intravenously or intra- 
muscularly (Ix)pion, Myocrisin, Solganal B). The initial dose 
is 0-01 grin, increasing to 0*1 grm. The injections are given 
at weekly inter\"als until a total of 1 giTii. has been given. 
Treatment sliould then cease for three months before a second 
course is started. The actual dose and the extent to which 
it is increased depend on the reaction produced. The aim should 
be to give such an amount of the drug as will produce an 
exacerbation of symptoms lasting twenty-four hours. The 
blood sedimentation rate is a guide to treatment. Injections 
must be stoppe^d if toxic manifestations, such as albuminuria, 
anajinia or a falling leucocyte count, rashes, wliether erythema- 
tous or purpuric, or stomatitis, develop. Diseases of the heart, 
liver, or kidneys are contraindications to gold therapy; tc^sts 
of renal function should always precede treatment. 

Treatment by iJnajs. — Avspirin in lO-gr. doses, especially 
if combined with 5 gr. of phenaoetin or medinal, ma\" give 
considerable relief. vSupjiosed intestinal antiseptics, such as 
salol and guaiaool, are of no value. The patient is usually 
anaemic and iron should be given in full doses. 

General Manayemeni , — An essential point in the treatment 
of rheumatoid arthritis is the prevention of deformity^. Tliis 
object is best obtained by ensuring that the joints are kept in 
satisfactory position during the acute stage of the disease. 
To avoid wrist-drop and foot-drop, suitable splints must be 
applied, and it is most important to prevent the knees becoming 
fixed in a position of flexion. The blood sedimentation rate 
should be estimated at intervals, as a fall in the rate is an 
indication of improvement. The moet valuable guide as to 
the activity of the disease is tenderness on pressure over the 
affected joints. So long as this j)er8ists, rest is indicated, but 
all the affected joints should be gently moved thiough their 
full range once every day to prevent the formation of adhesions. 
When the joint is no longer tender, active movements and 
massage must be instituted. If deformities such as wrist-drop 
have occurred, no attempt should be made to improve the 
position of joints by forcible movement, either with or without 
an ansBSthetic, until local tenderness has disappeared. Any 



760 APFECTIONS OP THE JOINTS AND BONES 


manipulation of joints which are actively inflamed is likely to 
lead to a serious exacerbation of symptoms. 

The problem of the restoration of function in joints 
deformed by rheumatoid arthritis is mainly one for the 
orthopaedic surgeon. Even in oases which appear hopeless, 
great improvement may result. It must be realised that to 
a certain extent rheumatoid arthritis is a self-limited disease, 
the activity of which tends to die out in the course of years, 
even if completely untreated. In chronic oases a great dead 
of disability is due rather to laiok of function tJwn to orgatnic 
chainges in the joints, and provided there are no signs of active 
disease, vigorous re-education is advisable. Only too often 
chronic oases of rheumatoid aarthritis aiie allowed to lie in bed 
aas x>ermanent incurables, whereas active amd ptassive move- 
ments, combined with enoouraigement, will often enable the 
patient to get about. 

Mausaige, active aand passive movements, radiaant heat, 
diathermy, looad application of hot paraffin wax, whirlpool 
and foam baths may aall help to accelerate recovery aand to 
restore tone to the wasted muscles. 

The outlook in rheumatoid arthritis is certainly less gloomy 
than it was twenty years ago, mainly owing to gold therapy, 
improved orthopaeic treatment, and better physiotlierapeutic 
measures. In dealing with patients suffering from the disease, 
it is essential, though often difficult, to maintain an atmosphere 
of optimism. 

Still’s Disease. — This is a rare disease occurring in children, 
usually starting between the agee of three and six. It is 
chara^rised by a multiple arthritis, which in ite character- 
istics is similar to rheumatoid arthritis. There is also a general 
enlargement of lymph glands and an enlarged spleen. The 
disease runs a prolonged coiuse with exacerbations and 
remissions. The cause of Still’s disease is unknown but it is 
thought to be infective. 

Akktlosino SpoNDinxns 

Ankylosing spondylitis, or, as it is sometimes termed, 
sjxmdyhse rhizomdiqm, is a relatively unoonunon disease. 
Unlike rheumatoid arthritis its incidence is almost entirely con- 
fined to males and its onset is in late adolescence to twenty-five 
years of age. The main changes are found in the spine and 
sacro-iliac joints, but sometimes the hip and shoulder Joints 
are involved subsequently. 

Nothing is known of the origin of the condition, and there 



Plate :iO 


Ankylosing spondylitis. Advanced st-age, showing “bamboo spine,” calcifica- 
tion of ligaments, osteoporosis of spine and obliteration of sacro-iliae joints. 
{Trom '"'The. Rh/^umatic />i.vro.sT.s\*’ by Francis liach^ M.D. Cassell, 1935.) 


[To fact ixigt ToO. 




l*i.»TK :{J 

lit In ' hnlii a, .nho\Mii,j *>{ tlir Im^h. > (jf iln* linni 

fourth hiiijl>,tf \ rrt< bra , au<l nnriDu] ‘^in r« 

{hrf)in *“ The lih( uiniitic J Tran* ia linch^ M h < ttfiAf ll, i 


[ V'o fttc* 7 '• I . 




NON-ARTICULAR RHEUMATISM 751 

is little evidence that eradication of focal infection is beneficial. 
From a pathological point of view the chief changes are osteo- 
porosis of the bodies of the vertebr® fimd calcification of the 
ligaments of the spine, particularly the lateral and interspinous 
ligaments. This results ultimately m a completely fixed spine 
which gives a characteristic X-ray picture, often described as 
a “ bamboo spine ” (vide Plate 30). It is a striking contrast 
to the osteo-arthritio spine (vide Plate 31). In the latter 
there is much lipping of the bodies of the vertebrae and no 
calcification of the ligaments. The spine is usually kyphotic, 
and in advanced cases the chest becomes fixed, owing to bony 
ankylosis of the costo-vertebral articulations. 

The symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis are pains in the 
back, spreading down to the arms and legs, striking limitation 
of movement, and later deformity of the back with varying 
degrees of limitation of movement in the hips. The condition 
is usually slowly progressive over a number of years, and 
ultimately the patient may succumb to intercurrent respiratory 
infection. 

Treatment is often unsatisfactory, but sometimes deep 
X-ray and gold therapy will arrest the disease. Attempts 
must be made to prevent gross deformities, and during 
exacerbations complete rest in a good position is essential. 
Remissions occur, the disease sometimes becoming arrested 
spontaneously. 


NON-ARTICULAR RHEUMATISM 

Aches and pains in the muscles as opposed to the joints 
are a very common complaint, which causes a vast amount of 
invalidism and absence from work. The condition is variously 
described as muscular rheumatism, fibrositis, lumbago, torti- 
collis, neuritis, or pleurodynia. Without doubt some of the 
cases previously diagnosed as lumbago are due to prolapsed 
intervertebral discs, while others diagnosed as fibrositis 
ultimately turn out to have a serious underljdng condition, such 
as spondylitis or secondary deposits in the spine. Symptoms 
occur most often in males of middle age or over and appear 
to be precipitated by exposure to wet or cold and hard or 
imaccustomed muscular exertion. 

One of the most frequent sites of pain is^the lumbar fascia 
and the attachments of the lumbar muscles, when the condition 
is usually described as lumbago. A similar condition in the 
muscles of the neck produces torticollis. When the intercostal 



752 ATFEcrriONS OP THE JOINTS AND BONES 

muscles are affected, there is pain on taking a deep breath or 
on mov^ements of the thorax (pleurodynia). Pibrositis of the 
upper portion of the trapezius may produce brachial neuritis. 
As a rule there is little or no impairment of general health 
and no pyrexia. The sedimentation rate remains normal. 
On examination tender nodules are sometimes palpable in the 
affected muscles, but similar nodules can often be palpated 
in apparently normal muscles. Without doubt in many cases 
of so-called fibrositis the symptoms are an expression of an 
emotional disorder and are purely psychogenic. Rheuma- 
tism ” is also a common complaint among those who wish to 
shirk unpleasant duties or to absent themselves from work. 

Many and varied treatments are advised. It is doubtful 
if focal sepsis is a cause of fibrositis, but if there is definite 
sepsis, such as a root abscess, it should be dealt with. Injection 
of novocaine into any tender nodules detected may give relief. 
Physiotherapeutic measures such as diathermy or irradiation 
with infra-red rays and massage undoubtedly do good in most 
cases. When the condition is wholly or in part psychogenic 
it is important not to allow physiotherapy to be continued 
indefinitely. 

Myositis Ossificans . — This rare condition is characterised 
by intramuscular ossification. It xumaUy foUows acute or 
chronic trauma or occupational strain of certain muscle groups, 
and occurs most commonly in the muscles of the thigh, and in 
the upper arm. Ossification has been reported in muscles 
and tendons in association with tabes dorsaUs and syringo- 
myelia. Even without interference myositis ossificans follow- 
ing trauma shows a marked tendency to retrogress and 
ultimately disappear. 

Bornholm Disease (Epidemic myalgia). — In this condition, 
which may possibly be a virus infection, there is abdominal 
pain and the muscles, especially those of the abdominal wall, 
are extremely tender. The onset is sudden with slight fever 
and the patient’s may appear to be suffering from an acute 
abdominal emergency. Recovery occurs spontaneously in 
about a week. 


DISEASES OF BONES 

Osteitifl Deformans. — This condition is often known as 
Paget’s disease. .The onset is very gradual and symptoms 
seldom arise before middle life. The striking features are a 
progressive enlargement in the circumference of the head, 
together with a symmetrical thickening and bowing of the 



DISEASES OF BONES 763 

long bones, more particularly the femur and tibia. The 
increase in the size results from formation of new bone beneath 
the periosteum. The disease is often associated with arterio- 
sclerosis, but nothing is known of its causation. 

Headache is a frequent s3miptom and there is sometimes 
pain and tenderness in the affected bones, which are liable to 
fracture with slight trauma. The disease is slowly progressive 
and is not in itself fatal, though death is liable to occur from 
interourrent infections and from sarcomata arising in the 
affected bones. No treatment appears to modify its course. 

Osteogenesis Imperfecta. — This rare condition is congenital, 
with a tendency to occur in families. Survival to adult life is 
unusual. The disorder is primarily nutritional, and the bones, 
particularly the long bones, are unduly fragile ; the cortex of 
the bone is thin and deficient in calcium. Spontaneous 
fractures are the most prominent symptom and lead to marked 
deformity and shortening of the limbs. Often there is a blue 
coloration of the sclerotics. There is no treatment beyond 
the exorcise of care in avoiding trauma. If the patient reaches 
adolescence, spontaneous improvement occurs. 

Osteomalacia. — -This disease is almost confined to the 
female sex and usually occurs between the ages of twenty and 
thirty. It is often associated with pregnancy ; defective 
hygienic conditions and an unsatisfactory diet are also pre- 
di8j)08ing causes. 

The bones affected are the long bones, spine, ribs, and 
j)elvi 8 . The amount of calcium in these is much diminished, 
and as a result the bones are softer and more fragile than 
normal. Spontaneous fracture is common, and thia may be 
the first obvious symptom of the disease. In advanced cases 
great deformity results from the softness of the bones ; this 
is specially true of the pelvis, in which the sacrum is pushed 
downwards as the result of the weight of the body, while the 
acetabula are driven inwards by the heads of the femurs. 

The course of osteomalacia is very variable, but the disease 
is usually progressive, and death eventually results from 
intercurrent respiratory infections. Further pregnancies should 
be avoided, and a diet rich in calcium and phosphorus should 
be taken. Cod-liver oil is sometimes beneficial. 

Multiple Myelomatosis. — In this rare condition the bone- 
marrow is invaded by multiple neoplasms of sarcomatous tjqpe. 
Spontaneous fractures are very common. In many of the 
cases the urine contains Bence-Jones protein. This can be 
demonstrated by heating the urine ; when the temperature 
reaches about 60 ® C., the protein coa^ates with the formation 
48 



764 AFFECTIONS OF THE JOINTS AND BONES 

of a turbid precipitate ; if the heating is continued to the 
boiling point the coagulated protein becomes redissolved. 

Achondroplasia. — This disease originates during foetal life 
and affects mainly the bones which develop from cartilage. 
Those most commonly involved are the long bones, the pelvic 
bones, and the base of the skull. Growth is stunted, and 
achondroplasiacs who reach adult life are seldom over 4 ft. 
in height ; the legs and arms are very short in comparison 
with the development of the trunk ; the face appears small, 
but the cranial vault is normal in size. Although the bones 
are short and bowed, they are strong and do not fracture 
readily. Intelligence is normal, and the subjects of the disease 
often live in good health to an old age. The fingers tend to 
be equal in length. Treatment is ineffective. 

Hypertrophic Pulmonary Osteo-arthropathy.— This cumber- 
some name is given to the condition of “ clubbing ” in the 
fingers and certain bony changes which occur in bronchiectasis, 
empyema, chronic j)hthisis, and congenital heart disease. 

Clubbing of the fingers is very common in all the above- 
mentioned conditions, and a similar change also occurs in the 
toes. The terminal phalanx is swollen and often somewhat 
cyanosed ; the finger-nail is curved, and at the base of the 
nail the skin has a shiny, tense appearance. In marked cases 
the tips of the fingers are exj)anded in both their antero- 
posterior and lateral diameters. The clubbing is nearly always 
symmetrical, though a few cases of unilateral clubbing have 
been rejwrted. X-ray examination shows no obvious change 
m the bony structure of the terminal phalanges. 

In addition to clubbing there is occasionally enlargement 
of the bones of the extremities, particularly of the hands 
and feet, and sometimes osteo-arthritic changes in the joints. 
Whereas clubbed fingers are, very common, the fully developed 
condition of pulmonary osteo-arthropathy is exceedingly rare. 
Vt'hether the changes are due to interference with tissue nutri- 
tion, which result from prolonged venous congestion, or whether 
there is some specific toxaemia rt^mains undecided. 

Oeoeralued Osteitis Fibrosa is discussed under Disorders 
of the Parathyroid {vide p. 2 h1). 


J. J. CONYBEARB. 



DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 


THE GENERAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF 
ORGANIC NERVOUS DISEASES 

T he central nervous system, enclosed within the bony 
framework of skull and vertebral column, is inaccessible 
to direct observation ; hence, with the exception of the 
head of the optic nerve which lies open to view in the fundus 
of the eye, the nervous system cannot be investigated by the 
clinical methods of inspection, palpation, or percussion, upon 
which we so largely dej^end in the diagnosis of diseases of the 
thoracic and abdominal viscera. Therefore the recognition 
and clinical localisation of disease within the nervous S5"8tem 
depend upon the observation and interpretation of signs of 
disordered activity in tissues innervated by this system. In 
short, the diagnosis of nervous diseases is more largely a 
matter of applied anatomy and physiology than is the case 
with diseases of other systems. 


The Functional. Reactions op the Nervous 
System to Disease 

The activities of any part of the nervous system which 
is directly involved in a focus of disease or injury may be 
disordered in either of two ways. They may be diminished 
or abolished on the one hand, or they may be stimulated 
to an excessive degree on the other. Thus a lesion of the 
cerebral motor cortex may by destruction of nerve cells 
produce motor paralysis, or by stimulation give rise to a focal 
or Jacksonian convulsion. Both effects may l>e combined ; a 
focal fit being followed by motor weakness. It is usual to 
speak of the two orders of symptoms so produced as paralytic 
and irritative respectively. Again, while the nervous system 
shows a high degree of local specialisation of function, yet 

755 



756 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

normally it acts as a whole, and damage to any one part of 
it may be followed by disorder of function in regions left 
untouched by disease. Such disorders may be said to be 
indirectly produced and, like those directly caused, are of two 
orders. For example, when a haemorrhage occurs within a 
cerebral hemisphere and tears up the pyramidal fibres as they 
course down through the internal capsule, the direct result of 
the lesion is a hemiplegia. But there is also a sudden loss of 
consciousness which may persist for some days. A predominant 
part in the production of this coma is played by “ shock or 
diaschisis,'' the functions of both cerebral hemispheres being 
temporarily abrogated on the sudden development of a gross 
destructive lesion within their substance. This shock passes 
off, aU parts of the cerebrum resuming activity except that 
actually destro3^ed bj^ the haemorrhage, while the direct result 
of the destruction, the hemiplegia, remains as a more or less 
permanent residuum. 

But the hemiplegia, at first flaccid, in course of time becomes 
spastic, that is, the muscles which have lost voluntary power 
begin to develop an excessive tonus, show exaggerated tendon 
reflexes and the phenomenon of clonus. In certain circum- 
stances thej^ maj^ even develop involuntary^ movements. All 
these phenomena indicate an excessive activity of parts of the 
nervous system not destroyed by the lesion, but rather released 
from a control normalty exercised over them by the neurones 
now destroy^ed. Thus there are four groups of symptoms of 
disordered action of the nervous system : — 

Directly produced 

Indirectly produced 

It will be readily appreciated that of these, symptoms due to 
shock and irritation tend to be transient, while those resulting 
from destruction or release may persist indefinitely. In many 
chronic nervous diseases, such as paralysis agitans, residual 
hemiplegia, and double athetosis, release symptoms may be 
in the forefront of the clinical picture, paral^ic mamfestations 
taking the second place. 

There are other factors governing the im})airment or 
dissolution of function in diseases of the nen^ous system, to 
some of which we may summarily refer. Thus acutely 
produced lesions are apt to cause more intense and extensive dis- 
orders of function than similarly localised and extensive lesions 


( Paralytic ” symptoms. 
('Irritative'’ „ 

I “ Shock ” 

I Release ” ,, 



GENERAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY 


757 


of gradual development. Again, when a high-grade fimc- 
tion is undergoing dissolution from the action of a disease 
process, its most recently and finely developed aspects are 
earlier and more severely impaired than its older and simpler 
components. Thus in residual hemiplegia the isolated and 
skilled movements of the fingers are more severely impaired 
than the simpler movements in the proximal parts of the 
upper limb, and recover less rapidly and completely than 
the latter. Again, in that complex motor function, articulate 
speech, the power of expressing thought in a foreign language 
may be lost in an individual who retains this power in his 
native tongue. Similarly, a comparable, graded dissolution 
of sensory ftmction may result from appropriate cerebral 
lesions. 

Again, we cannot regard the central nervous system as 
entirely independent of the other tissues of the body. Its 
activity is, for example, delicately responsive to variations in 
the quaUty and quantity of its blood supply. The nerve cell 
in particiilar is extremely sensitive to oxygen deprivation, 
being stimulated at first and then paralysed as the oxygen 
supply drops below normal. The convulsions of asphyxia and 
those which may accompanj^ sudden profuse haemorrhage mto 
the peritoneal cavity are examples of the hyperexcitability 
developed by the cell at a certain level of oxygen starvation. 
The coma which ensues indicates abohtion of function from 
more severe oxygen want. It is probable that the Jacksonian 
fits produced by compression of the cerebral motor cortex, 
either by a tumour or by a depressed fragment of bone, owe 
their origin to vascular disturbances of this kind and not to 
direct mechanical stimulation of the cortex. 


The Structural Reactions of the Nervous System 
TO Disease 

In what is primarily a clinical account of neiwous diseases, 
the structural reactions may be very briefly described. The 
complete nervous system may be regarded as consisting of 
vascular, supporting, and parenchymatous elements. In a 
given case of nervous disease any one of these may be primarily 
affected, the others being secondarily involved, and the 
resulting lesion will be the combined reaction of all three to 
the pathogenic agent. Thus a primary parenchymatous 
degeneration will be followed by a secondary glial proliferation 
and by a phagocytic activity of certain glial elements. 



758 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


SYMPTOMS OF DISEASE OF THE MOTOR SYSTEM 

The motor system may be taken to consist of three main 
components : (1) the pyramidal or upper motor neurone 

extending from the cerebral motor cortex to the anterior horn 
cells of the opposite side of the spinal cord ; (2) a complex 
group of extra-pyramidal neurones, comprising numerous 
masses of grey matter in the cerebral hemispheres and in the 
brain stem, with the fibre systems arising in them and 
extending in one or more links to the ventral horn cells of 
the cord ; and (3) the lower motor neurone, which includes 
the motor nuclei of the cranial nerves and the anterior horn 
cells of the spinal cord. 

The last named is “ the final common path to the skeletal 
muscles, and upon it play the upper motor and extra-pyramidal 
systems of neurones, and also the central ends of the afferent 
limbs of the spinal reflex arcs. 

The Upper Motor Neurone may be regarded as the sole 
path for the conduction of volitional motor impulses and as 
exercising control over the extra-pjTamidal motor system ; 
therefore damage or destruction of this neurone has a dual 
effect. There is an impairment or loss of voluntary movement, 
a directly produced phenomenon, and an increase of muscle 
tone and of tendon reflexes, with a qualitative change in the 
plantar response. The latter are release phenomena, and 
result from the imcontrolled activity of extra-pjTamidal motor 
mechanisms which still continue to play upon the lower motor 


(Reference to Fig. 16.) 

The cerebroapinal or pyramidal tract (Pyr.) ariees in the cerebral motor cortex 
and, trayersing the internal capsule and brain-stem, decussates in the medulla 
oblongata. It then runs downwards in the lateral white column of the spinal cord, its 
fibres terminating in the grey matter of the anterior horn. The vestibulo-spinal tract 
(V.Sp.T.) arises in the vestibular nucleus (V.N.) and runs downwards through the 
medulla and the anterior white column of the spinal cord, its fibres terminating in the 
grey matter of the anterior horn. The rubro-spinal tract (li.Sp.T.) arises in the red 
nucleus (B.N.) in the midbrain, decussates at its level of origin, and traverses the 
lateral part of the pons and medulla and the lateral column of the spinal cord, 
its fibres ending like those of the tracts already enumerated in the anterior horn 
in association with the anterior or ventral horn motor cells. 

The cerebellum sends efferent fibres from its dentate nucleus (D.N.) to the 
cross e d red nucleus through the superior cerebellar peduncle, the cerebcllo- rubral 
tract (C.R.T.). 

A short projection system arises in the globus pallidus of the lenticular (lentiform) 
nucleus (L.N.) and passes to the red nucleus, the striato-rubral tract. 

These various efferent paths, other than the pyramidal tract, form the best- 
known components of the extra-pyramidal motor system, and all of them, 
inoiuding the former, exert influence upon the lower motor neurone (the anterior 
or ventral horn cell and its axone). 





760 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

neurone. The condition of spastic paralysis resulting from 
disease of the upper motor neurone is seen in its fullest 
expression in residual hemiplegia. The loss of voluntary 
movement in hemiplegia affects unilateral movements only, 
and these unequally. Thus in the upper limb, which is usually 
more affected than the lower, movements of the fingers and 
hand are most impaired. In the leg the movements of 
dorsiflexion and of flexion are more profoundly impaired than 
those of plantar flexion and extension. In the face, the 
movements of the lower half are alone involved, while the 
tongue is protruded towards the paralysed side. The trunk 
muscles commonly escape, as do the movements of deglutition 
and mastication. 

The hypertonus, or spasticity as it is sometimes called, 
also has a selective incidence, developing in the flexors and 
adductors of the upper and in the extensor and plantar- 
flexors of the lower limb. Thus the spastic arm goes into 
flexion and adduction, the spastic leg into extension and 
adduction. When spasticity is sufficiently developed, not 
only are the tendon jerks increased but patellar and ankle 
clonus may be present. Also imder certain conditions 
involuntary tonic spasm invades the muscles leading to 
changes of attitude in these, which are spoken of as ** associated 
reactions.’’ Finally, the normal reflex movement of plantar- 
flexion of the hallux on stroking the sole of the foot is 
replaced by one of dorsiflexion, the so-called extensor or 
Babinski response. This response is accompanied by reflex 
contraction of all the limb flexors, which in certain cases of 
paraplegia may develop into a powerful flexor spasm of the 
limb. The abdominal reflexes also disappear in upf)er motor 
neurone lesions. In lesions of the spinal cord involving both 
pyramidal tracts, a condition of spastic paraplegia results. 

The Extra-pyramidal Motor Neurones. — ^These include the 
corpus striatum, red nucleus, substantia nigra, and other 
deeply seated masses of grey matter in the brain, and the short 
and descending paths arising in them. The characteristics of 
disease of this complex system are an absence of true paralysis, 
and the presence of disturbances of muscle tone (Parkinsonian 
rigidity) and of involuntary movements (athetosis, tremor, 
choreiform movements). In uncomplicated lesions of this 
system the reflexes imdergo no qualitative change. The 
most familiar example of an extra-pyramidal symptom-complex 
is paralysis agitans, or Parkinson’s disease. 

The Lower Motor Neurone. — When this neurone is destroyed 
by disease the skeletal musole is cut off from all functional 



DISEASE OF AFFERENT NERVOUS SYSTEM 761 


connection with the nervous system. There is a degree of 
paralysis proportionate to the degree of denervation, a loss 
of reflex muscle tone and of the tendon reflexes, followed by 
muscular atrophy which may proceed to complete loss of 
contractile substance in the affected muscles in which secondary 
fibrosis and deformity finally ensue. In addition, the electrical 
excitability of the muscle alters and finally disappears. 
(Reaction of Degeneration, Total Loss of Excitability.) 

The Cerebellar System. — Although, strictly speaking, this 
system should be included amongst extra- pyramidal motor 
mechanisms, it is usual to deal with its symptomatology 
separately. The essential clinical result of a loss or impairment 
of cerebellar activity is the development of a gross disturbance 
of co-ordination in voluntary movement, the so-called cerebellar 
ataxy, and hypotonia. There are no true paralyses and no 
qualitative changes in the reflexes. A description of these 
disturbances of movement will be dealt with under the 
appropriate heading {vide p. 783). 


SYMPTOMS OF DISEASE OF THE AFFERENT 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 

The afferent nervous system includes semory and non- 
sensory components. The latter, which is not less important 
than the sensory component, includes the afferent hnks of 
numerous reflex arcs. The grey matter in which lie the 
synapses of these arcs is situated at all levels of the spinal 
cord and brain stem, and the impulses which traverse the 
arcs do not influence consciousness. The spinal arcs subserve 
the tendon reflexes and certain reflex movements which 
underlie the co-ordination of movement. The long arcs which 
pass up to the brain stem are predominantly concerned in the 
maintenance of muscle tone and in the regulation of posture. 
The spino-cerebellar tracts form part of this non-sensory 
afferent system. The loss of muscle tone and of tendon 
reflexes, which are amongst the cardinal signs of tabes dorsalis, 
depend upon a lesion of certain of these non-sensory afferent 
fibres as they lie in the root entry zone of the posterior wliite 
columns of the cord. Disappearance of the tendon reflexes, 
when not due to paralysis of the muscle concerned, depends 
upon an interruption of the afferent limb of the arc either in 
the mixed peripheral nerve, the posterior spinal root, or in 
the intramedullary part of the latter as it lies in the posterior 
column of the cord. 



762 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


The Semory System, like the motor system, consists of a 
chain of neurones extending from the periphery to the highest 
sensory centres in the thalamus and cerebral cortex. 

The mixed peripheral nerve contains fibres underlying 
every aspect of sensibility, both cutaneous and deep, hence 
impairment or loss of all modes of sensation follows a peripheral 
nerve lesion, and localisation of the lesion depends upon the 
determination of the topography of the area of altered 
cutaneous sensibility. There are four groups of cutaneous 
nerve fibres and nerve endings. They subserve tactile, painful, 
and thermal (hot and cold) sensibility. Although the neurones 
of all four groups run together in the peripheral nerve, each 
group has its own special anatomical and physiological pro- 
perties. The power of localising the skin region stimulated 
by tactile, thermal, or painful stimuli, and of discriminating 
two simultaneous stimuli from a single stiniulus, is probably 
a resultant of the anatomical grouping of the sensory end- 
organs in the skin. It seems likely that the p]i 3 "siological 
cutaneous sensory unit is comprised by all the cutaneous end- 
organs innervated by a single dorsal root fibre, and is not, as 
has hitherto been supposed, the single sensory end-organ. Each 
such end-organ has a multiple innervation, and not less than 
two ner\"e fibres subserving the mode of sensibility peculiar 
to the end-organ enter each of the latter, wliile in the case of 
tactile and thermal forms of sensibility a nerve fibre belonging 
to the pain system also innervates it. 

It is the presence of the last-named fibre that gives rise 
to pain when a tactile end-organ in the skin is subjected to 
very strong stimulation. 

Under normal conditions it must be rare indeed for less 
than several groups of sensory end-organs to bo stimulated at 
one time, and the capacity for localising stimuli may he a 
resultant of the simultaneous stimulation of spatially separated 
end-organs. It is not a function of a 8i>ccial tyjK* of end -organ 
or nerve fibre. 

The Central Sensory Paths.— On reaching the si)inal cord 
the sensory fibres undergo a regrouping according to the modes 
of sensibility they subserve, and travel up in the cord in 
special paths. Thus impulses underlying tactile sensibility 
and the sense of position travel up in the original |)eripheral 
neurone in the uncrossed posterior wliite column as far as the 
posterior column nuclei of the medulla oblongata ; here they 
end, and the second sensory neurones arise, crossing the midline 
as the arcuate fibres in the decussation of the fillet (sensory 
decussation), and then turning upwards as the medial fillet 



DISEASE OF AFFERENT NERVOUS SYSTEM 763 



On the right the sensoiy pathway is represented in its longitudinal course. On the 
left a series of transverse sections indicate the positions occupied by the components 
of the sensory path at the different levels of the brain-stem. The uncrossed sensory 
path runs up in the dorsal white column, its fibres terminating in the dorsal column 
nuclei of the medulla (nuclei of Goll and Burdach). The path then decussates 
(decussation of the fillet) and runs up as the mesial fillet to the thalamus. The 
crossed sensory path travels upwards in the lateral column (lateral spino-thalamio 
tract) and in the ventral column (ventral spino- thalamic tract). These two meet 
in the medulla and run up together in the lateral region of the medulla and pons, 
gradually nearii^ the fillet and finally becoming continuous with it in the mid- 
brain. The entire sensory pathway reaches the thalamus. Thence it di\ddo8, one 
component passing to the main thalamic nucleus, another passing to the sensory 
cerebral cortex. In dotted lines is represented a cortico-thalamic tract which, so 
it has been supposed, transmits cortical control of the thalamic component of the 
sensory mechanism. (Modified after Head and Holmes.) Th., thalamus. N.C., 
caudate nucleus. L.N., lenticular nucleus. Sp. Th., spino-thalamio tract. Pyr., 
pyramidal tract. F., Fillet. 



764 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

to traverse the pons and midbrain, and end in the thalamus. 
The fibres carrying impulses underl 3 dng painful and thermal 
sensibility end in the posterior horns of the side on which they 
enter the cord, the second neurone crossing the midline to 
travel up through cord and brain stem in the lateral regions of 
both, to reach the thalamus with the medial fillet. We thus 
have uncrossed and crossed sensory paths in the cord, and in 
the brain stem two sensor\^ paths, now both crossed, which 
finally meet in the lateral nucleus of the thalamus. Here the 
sensor^" path undergoes a final rearrangement. Impulses 
underhung the affective aspects of sensibility, particularly pain 
and thermal sensibilit}^ pass to the essential nucleus of the 
thalamus, where it is possible that they reach consciousness to 
form the basis of the corresponding sensations. Those under- 
lying tactile sensibilitj", and the discriminative aspects of 
sensibility, pass to the cerebral sensorj^ cortex which is situated 
mainh" in the post -central convolution. 

In general, a cerebral or bram-stem lesion involving the 
8ensor\^ pathwaj-s produces a crossed hemiaiuesthesia. In 
the case of cortical lesions, thermal and painful sensation are 
little if at all affected, and the characteristic disturbance 
is an inabihty to localise cutaneous stimuli, especiaUj^ tactile 
stimuli, and a defective appreciation of the size, shape, and 
texture of objects held in the affected hand (astereognosis). 
The characteristics of sensory loss from lesions at lower levels 
within the central nervous system will be dealt with under 
the appropriate headings. 

Inco-ordination of Movement. — The disorders of voluntary 
movement known as atax 3 ^ or inco-ordination, require brief 
mention here, as they arise in one of two ways. In lesions 
of the cerebellum or of the cerebellar fibre system, a form 
of atax}^ may develop which has been mentioned above as 
cerebellar atax} . This ataxy is not dependent upon any 
disturbance of the sensorj’ nervous system, and is not 
aggravated when the jmtient is deprived of vision. 

On the other hand, any lesion in spinal cord, brain stem, 
or cerebral hemispheres which interrupts the sensory iinpulses 
conveying the sense of position and the appreciation of 
movement wdll produce what is known as a sensory ataxy. 
Perfect co-ordination reqxiires accurate information from the 
muscles as to their degree of contraction, and thus as to the 
position of the limbs, trunk, and head. If this information 
be not forthcoming, control of movement is impaired or lost, 
and ataxy results. The lack of this information may be com- 
pensated in a great measure by vision, but if the patient’s 



DISEASE OF AFFERENT NERVOUS SYSTEM 765 

eyes be closed this compensation is lost and the maximal 
degree of disorder of movement is produced. The most 
famihar example of a sensory ataxy of this order is seen in 
tabes dorsalis, where the sensory fibres xmderlying the relevant 
forms of sensibility are degenerated in the posterior columns 
of the spinal cord. When the lower limbs are the seat of this 
disorder, the typical tabetic ataxy of gait and stance results, 
and is aggravated when the subject shuts his eyes, a procedure 
which is the basis of Romberg’s test. 

In the case of the upper limbs the contrast between the two 
forms of ataxy, cerebellar and sensory, is also readily observed. 
The so-called intention tremor of the arms is an example of 
the former variety, and is not aggravated when the subject’s 
eyes are shut. When the patient is asked to touch his nose 
with his finger with his eyes closed, the limb deviates on its 
way, but reaches the nose correctly. In the sensory ataxy 
of tabes, however, the sense of position of the limb being 
impaired, the subject’s hand wanders and fails to reach the 
desired objective unless the aid of vision be forthcoming. 


Electrical Reactions of Muscle 

A healthy muscle in normal functional connection with the 
nervous system responds by contraction when its motor nerve 
is stimulated by the faradic (interrupted), or the galvanic 
(continuous) current. The muscle fibres themselves are 
responsive to the make and break of the continuous current, 
but are inexcitable by the interrupted current. The situation 
at which the application of the stimulating electrode in both 
forms of current gives the maximal response is the point at 
which the motor nerve enters the belly of the muscle, the 
so-called “ motor point.” The faradic current is obtained from 
an induction coil, and when applied in sufficient strength 
provokes a muscular response which persists during the passage 
of the current. The response to the galvanic current, on the 
other hand, is restricted to the moments at which the cmrent 
is made and broken. 

The galvanic response consists therefore in momentary 
muscle twitches when the current is made and broken, or, in 
other words, when the circuit is closed and opened. Either 
cathode or anode may be used as stimulating electrode, and 
the relative potency of the four stimuli thus made possible is 
expressed by the formula KCC> ACC> AOC>KOC, where KCC 
represents the cathodal closing contraction, AC!C the anodal 



766 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

closing contraction, AOC the anodal opening contraction, and 
KOC the cathodal opening contraction. Thus it follows 
that the minimal effective current is that which evokes a 
KCC alone. These differences are called the polar reactions. 
Abnormalities in electrical reaction may consist in simple 
quantitative alterations in excitability or in qualitative changes. 
Thus general h}q)erexcitabihty to both forms of current is 
found in tetanj', while hypoexcitability or loss of excitability 
to both forms of current is present in disuse atrophy of muscles 
and in the muscular dystrophies. 

In lower motor neurone lesions qualitative changes are found. 
When a muscle is denervated and the motor nerve fibres have 
degenerated, the reaction of degeneration is present. This 
consists in a loss of excitability to the faradic current and in 
an altered response to the galvanic current. Of this alteration 
to the galvanic current the essential features are a lowering 
of the threshold of stimulation and a j>eculiar sluggishness of 
contraction which is readily visible, the contraction wave some- 
times passing slowly along the muscle. A less constant and 
less readily distinguishable feature is the altered polarity of the 
response, ACC being now greater than KCC. This reaction 
(R.D.) api)ear8 in the third week after motor nerve section, 
and {)ersists as long as contractile muscle fibres remain in the 
paralysed muscle. Various degrees of partial reaction of 
degeneration are seen in incomplete interruption of motor 
nerves. It is not often that an investigation of the electrical 
reactions of a muscle affords information not obtainable by 
other methods, but in the case of facial palsy (BelFs palsy, 
q.v., p. 901) these reactions are of great prognostic value. The 
presence of faradic response in the second and tliird weeks 
indicates the probability of early recovery of function, but 
the presence of R.D. indicates complete denervation and the 
probability of delayed recovery. The electrical reactions are 
normal in upper motor and extra-pyramidal lesions. 


THE REFLEXES IN DIAGNOSIS 

The clinical study of the reflexes is of the greatest possible 
importance in the diagnosis of nen'^ous diseases, for while 
considerable disturbances of motor and sensory function 
may, as in the numerous clinical pictures of hysteria, 
coexist with a nervous system free from discoverable 
disease, qualitative alterations in the reflexes invariably 
mean organic disease of this system, and in the initial 



THE REFLEXES IN DIAGNOSIS 767 

stages of many such diseases diagnosis may turn entirely 
upon the state of these reflexes. 

Apart from gross structural changes, however, variations 
in the reflexes may occur as transient phenomena in certain 
intoxications and during epileptiform seizures. 

The reflexes which are of importance clinically fall into 
three groups : the tendon reflexes (tendon jerks), the cutaneous 
reflexes, and the Babinski or “ extensor ” type of plantar 
response. 

The Teiidoii Jerks are true spinal reflex reactions and are 
present in all healthy persons. Under emotional stress, in the 
psychoneuroses and in some debilitated persons, they may 
undergo a general increase in briskness, but in these circum- 
stances all the tendon jerks in upper and lower hmbs and on 
both sides are equally affected. An increase in the tendon 
reflexes in a single limb or in the hmbs of one side invariably 
indicates organic disease. In some normal individuals the 
tendon reflexes in the upper hmbs may be difficult to ehcit, 
while in small children and aged persons a similar difficulty 
may attend the attempt to obtain an ankle jerk. But with 
this exception the knee and ankle jerks should always be 
obtainable. ‘‘ Reinforcement may be necessary to ehcit 
them, and this is achieved by asking the subject to clench his 
fists or to make a sustained and forceful voluntary contraction 
of muscles not under investigation for the reflexes. In disease 
of the upper motor neurone, the tendon jerks undergo con- 
siderable increase, and the phenomenon of clonus may develop 
in spastic legs ; ankle clonus when the foot is dorsiflexed by 
the examiner, and pateUar clonus when the pateUa is depressed 
forcibly. In lesions of the lower motor neurone the tendon 
jerks are diminished or abolished in the affected muscles. In 
shght lesions this change may be the most striking physical 
sign, appearing before there is much muscular weakness or 
wasting. A similar change is seen in muscular diseases, e.g., 
in muscular dystrophy. 

A selective change in certain tendon reflexes may have a 
localising value in focal lesions of the spinal cord. The seg- 
mental localisation of the tendon reflexes employed clinically 
is given in the following table : — 

Biceps brachii . .6-6 Cervical s^ments. 

Triceps . . . . 6-7 „ „ 

Supinator (Brachioradialis) . 7-8 ,, „ 

Knee .... 2-4 Lumbar „ 

Ankle .1-2 Sacral 



768 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


The C'uianeovs Reflexes employed in clinical examination 
are the epigastric and abdominal and the cremasterio reflexes. 
These generally disappear in all lesions of the upper motor 
neurone at levels higher than that of their segmental spinal 
localisation, persisting unchanged in lower motor lesions unless 
the muscles engaged are themselves paralysed. In healthy 
persons stroking the sole of the foot evokes a plantar flexion 
of the great toe, the so-called “ flexor ” or normal type of 
plantar response. This also is a cutaneous reflex and, like 
those mentioned above, disappears in lesions of the upper 
motor neurone, being, however, replaced by a new type of 
plantar response which is not strictly a cutaneous reflex, 
although commonly described as such. 

The Extensor or Babinski Type of Plantar Response which 
replaces the normal or flexor type of plantar response is a 
physical sign of the utmost importance in clinical diagnosis. 
When present as a permanent phenomenon it invariably 
indicates structural change in the pyramidal system of fibres, 
that is, in the upper motor neurone. It may in any given case 
be the only imequivocal sign of such change, but even when 
thus occurring as an isolated abnormality its significance is 
unmistakable. As we have mentioned, it may occur transiently 
in epileptiform seizures (in eclampsia, uraemia, epilepsy, 
Jacksonian fits), and in certain intoxications without associated 
convulsions (delayed chloroform poisoning, acute yellow atrophy 
of the liver, cholaemia, and inconstantly in morphia, hyoscine, 
and barbiturate poisoning). 

The most striking feature of the reflex response is a dorsi- 
flexion of the great toe, generally with an associated dorsiflexion 
and fanning of the other toes. There is also, however, a constant 
reflex contraction in all the limb flexors. This may be so slight 
as to require palpation for its detection, or so violent (in certain 
severe paraplegias) as to constitute a powerful flexion spasm of 
the whole limb. The response is most easily and constantly 
elicited by stroking with the tip of the finger or with the point 
of a pencil the outer margin of the sole. In conditions of severe 
spastic paral^'sis of a leg, however, it may be obtained by 
pricking or pinching the skin almost anywhere over the whole 
limb, and also by pressure over bones and muscles over a 
similarly wide area. Therefore the response is not strictly 
plantar or purely cutaneous. It is homologous with the 
nocice])tive flexion reflex in the hind limb of the spinal animal 
(Sherrington). 



DISEASES OE THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 769 


THE CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 

The cerebrospinal fluid is secreted by the choroid plexuses 
of ' the lateral, third and fourth ventricles. It leaves the 
ventricular system by way of the foramina of Majendie and 
Luschka (median and lateral apertures) in the roof of the fourth 
ventricle, and passes into the basal cisterns of the subarachnoid 
space. Thence it flows through the opening between the 
tentorium and the brain stem up over the cerebral hemispheres, 
and also through^ the foramen magnum into the spinal theca. 
Finally, it is absorbed into the blood stream. This it reaches 
by means of tiny villous processes which arise in the arachnoid 
in the neighbourhood of the dural sinuses. The viUi cross 
the subdural space and penetrate the flbrous dural walls 
of the sinuses, projecting into the lumen. It is possible 
that some absor])tion may occur in a similar manner in 
the spinal subarachnoid space, but the main channels lie 
in the skull. 

The mam function of the fluid is probably mechanical, 
namely, that of providing a water cushion for the brain 
and spinal cord. It may also carry off degeneration products 
which flow into it from the perivascular spaces of the brain. 
It is probable that when secreted it contains neither cells 
nor protein, these being added to it in the course of its 
circulation. 

Composition, — It is a clear, colourless sahne fluid ; on 
lumbar puncture it is found to be under a pressure of from 
60 to 150 mm. of water. The total quantity is approximately 
130 c.c. As obtained from the theca it contains from 2 to 5 
lymphocytes per cubic millimetre, 0*02 to 0*04 per cent, protein, 
0 05 to 0 08 per cent, glucose, and 0*7 per cent, chlorides. Of the 
protein content, albumen predominates, being always in excess 
of the globuUn fraction, even when both are increased under 
pathological conditions. The pathological changes character- 
istic of various diseases are described under the appropriate 
headings. 

Changes may occur as the result of an altered secretion by 
the choroid plexuses, and in this respect the fluid follows very 
closely the composition of the blood plasma. But a fluid 
which is normal oh secretion may be altered as it circulates in 
the subarachnoid space, and it is with such an alteration that 
we are concerned in acute le}>tomcningitis. 


49 



ho 


Diseases of the nervous sYsTfiM 


DISEASES OF THE CEREBRAL MENINGES 
AND HYDROCEPHALUS 

The cerebral meninges may be the seat of inflammatory 
processes or of new growth formation, the former being the 
more common, especially in the case of the pia-arachnoid. 
It is probable, however, that tumour development in the 
meninges is not so rare as was formerly supposed. The so- 
called meningioma of the brain arises from arachnoidal cells 
I^ing in the substance of the dura mater, w^hile infiltration of 
the pia-arachnoid by glioma, sarcoma, and secondary carcinoma 
also occurs ; such infiltration is frequently microscopic and 
gives rise to symptoms resembling those of meningitis. 

Pachymeningitis 

True inflammation of the cerebral dura mater is compara- 
tively rare. In the presence of suppuration in the bones or 
sinuses of the skull a pyogenic pachymeningitis may develop. 
When infected from without in this way the dura presents at 
verj’^ resistant barrier to the passage of organisms to the undcr- 
h'ing brain, and an extra dural abscess may fonn. However,, 
infection may reach the subarachnoid space" and the brain by 
way of venous channels which traverse the, dura, or even by 
perforation of this membrane. In these circumstances an 
acute leptomeningitis or a cerebral abscess forms, and the local 
dural reaction becomes of minor importance. Gummatous 
pachymeningitis may also complicate 8}7)hilitic lesions of the 
skull. 

Chronic Subdural Hsematoma (Pachymeningitis Hoemor- 
rhagica Interna). — ^The condition to which this name is apjdied 
has been regarded as inflammatory in origin, but it is practically 
certain that it is always traumatic and the rc^sult of venous 
oozing into the subdural space. It is therefore more accurately 
named chronic subdural haematoma. 

Mtiology. — The essential lesion ap[K‘ars to the tearing 
of the small veins which pass from the arachnoid to the dura 
mater on their way to the venous sinuses w Inch lie in the latter. 
Relatively trivial jarring blows on the head, not necessarily 
of a degree of violence productive of concussion, are most 
likely to produce the venous lesion in question. I'he veins 
once injured, slow' and intermittent oozing leads to the gradual 
development of a subdural ha^raatoma. A subdural harnatoma 
may }>e the immediate result of a severe heail injury which 



CEREBRAL MENINGES AND HYDROCEPHALUS 771 

necessarily comes under observation and treatment from the 
outset. We are not here concerned with this type of subdural 
hsematoma, but only with that which follows apparently trivial 
injuries that receive little or no treatment and may not even 
come under observation. This chronic variety of hsematoma 
reveals its presence after a latent period of varying length by 
symptoms suggestive of a progressive space-occupying lesion. 
It is with this that the present chapter deals. 

Morbid Anatomy . — A collection of blood, often very large, 
is found situated beneath the dura over the convexity of 
the cerebral hemisphere and extending from the frontal to the 
occipital lobes, but seldom passing farther laterally than the 
Sylvian fissure (lateral sulcus). It is commonly bilateral, 
though not invariably so. The blood is encapsuled in a 
membrane which is loosely attached to the overlying dura, and 
may receive a free vascularisation from this source. The deep 
surface of the cyst is lightly adherent to the subjacent pia- 
arachnoid. On its internal surface the membrane is rough 
from adherent clot. The contained blood is tarry and liquid 
in long-standing cases, and the enclosing membrane may be 
discoloured by it. The state of the blood and the thickness of 
the cyst wall vary with the age of the lesion. It is probable 
that the cyst is formed by organisation of the peripheral clotted 
portion of the blood. 

Symptoms . — The liistory of a fall on the front or back of 
the head is frequently to be obtained. This may have been 
apparently trivial and not followed by any immediate conse- 
quences. Prodromal symptoms appear after a varying interval 
of from a week to two or three months. Headache and slight 
mental change are the most constant of these. The headache 
may be constant and severe, and may be referred to the site 
of the injury ; there may be associated vomiting. Gradually 
apathy, ^owsiness, and forgetfulness develop, and there may 
be “ fainting attacks.*' Physical examination may be negative 
at this period, and neuro-syphilis or some mental disorder may 
be diagnosed. When these symptoms liave been present for 
some four or six weeks they may suddenly become severe. 
Intense headache and vomiting with sudden coma may develop, 
only to pass off in an hour or two, returning again after an 
interval of days. Focal symptoms are often absent, or when 
present are variable in their appearance. Evidence of bilateral 
compression of the cerebral hemispheres ultimately develops : 
heraiparesis, muscular spasticity, bilateral loss of the abdominal 
reflexes, Babinski plantar responses, and optic neuritis. Once 
these signs are established the condition grows steadily worse, 



772 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

and unless treated the patient lapses into coma and dies. The 
pulse is often slow even in the early stages of the condition. 

Diagnosis , — In the presence of a history of apparently slight 
head injury, the premonitory period of vague and transient 
headaches and mental change, the appearance of definite stupor 
or coma after some weeks, and the variable appearance of the 
signs mentioned above, together present a very characteristic 
clinical picture, of which the very fluctuation of the signs and 
symptoms is one of the most striking features. Confirmatory 
evidence may occasionally be obtained by lumbar puncture, 
the cerebrospinal fluid being sometimes faintly tinged with 
yellow, though normal in other respects, but as a rule the 
fluid is colourless. 

Treatment , — This is exclusively surgical, and when the 
haematoma is of any size death ensues unless the clot be 
removed. That the malady is not invariably fatal, however, 
is seen by the finding at post mortem of long-standing lesions 
of this kind in elderly and demented subjects who have 
succumbed to some other malady. 

Acute Leptomeningitis 

Owing to the feeble bactericidal {lowers of the cerebro- 
8{)inal fluid and to its free circulation throughout the extensive 
subarachnoid space, an acute infective lef)tomeningiti8 
often leads to a ra}3idly fatal issue. When death does 
not ensue, however, the coagulation of inflammatory exudate 
in the basal cistern® and the resulting formation of ad- 
hesions interfere with the circulation and absorption of the 
cerebrospinal fluid, and thus lead to the devcloj)ment of 
internal h 3 ’drocephalus. However, since the introdiuttion of 
sulphonamide therapy this sequel i.s much less often seen 
than formerly. 

jEtiology . — Acute leptomeningitis is almost invariably' 
secondary to a focus of infection outside the nervous sy^stem. 
The sole probable exception is pneumococcal meningitis, and 
this not constantly so. Meningococcal meningitis (cerebro- 
spinal fever) formerly regarded as a primary meningitis is now 
thought to be a secondary invasion of the subarachnoid space 
frxim a primary infection of tlie nasopharynx. An acute lepto- 
meningitis may be set up by the pyogenic coc(*i, including the 
gonococcus, and by the tubercle, typhoid, anthrax and in- 
fluenzal organisms. In exceptional instances other organisms 
may l>e involved. 

The s[>ecial forms of acute meningitis are discussed under the 



CEREBRAL MENINGES AND HYDROCEPHALUS 773 

headings of the infections concerned, but some general observa- 
tions on the nature, morbid anatomy, and symptomatology of 
the meningeal reaction may appropriately be given here. 

Morbid Anatomy , — Although the inflammatory reaction in 
the meninges varies somewhat in appearance in accordance 
with the iidecting organism concerned, its general features are 
more or less constant. The pia-arachnoid becomes intensely 
hyperaemic, and in exceptional cases multiple small haemor- 
rhages may occur in its meshes. It also becomes oedematous 
and cloudy, and as fibrinous exudate is poured out it assumes 
a thickened gelatinous appearance. In the suppurative forms 
the fibrinous exudate soon becomes purulent. The process is 
usually most intense at the base of the brain, but as the exudate 
increases it tends to spread laterally along the Sylvian fossa 
and fissure (lateral sulcus) on to the convexity of the hemis- 
pheres, where it lies in the hollows between the convolutions, 
spreading in all directions from the Sylvian fissure. In non- 
suppurative tuberculous meningitis the spread of infection and 
the development of tubercles follow the same lines. Changes 
of the same order occur in the superficial layers of the brain 
underlying the meninges, namely, serous exudation, minute 
haemorrhages, and small foci of encephalitis and hyperaemia. 

The Cerebrospiruil Fluid , — The acute meningeal reaction 
reveals itself not only in the structural change noted above, 
but also in alterations in the composition of the cerebrospinal 
fluid. The nature and severity of the meningeal reaction may 
be determined from the examination of the cerebrospinal fluid, 
and therefore the procedure of lumbar puncture is a diagnostic 
method of the greatest value in acute meningitis. 

The essential features of the meningeal reaction as betrayed 
by this fluid are as follows : the cellular content is greatly 
increased, polymorphonuclear cells predominating in a suppura- 
tive meningitis, lymphocytes in the non-suppurative tuberculous 
form. The protein content is raised, and a coagulum may form 
in the fluid on standing. The glucose level falls and sugar may 
disappear, while the chloride content undergoes diminution. 
Finally, the organism concerned may be foimd. On lumbar 
puncture the fluid usually escapes under pressure. Excess of 
cells may render the fluid opalescent, while in suppurative 
meningitis it becomes purulent. 

Symptoms, — The essential clinical features of acute 
meningitis are remarkably constant, though variable in 
intensity from case to case. They consist of intense headache, 
pain in the back, with rigidity of the spine. There is a 
characteristic combination of irritability with drowsiness, 



774 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

passing on to terminal coma. The patient lies on his side in 
an attitude of flexion and in a stuporous condition, becoming 
irritable and i-efraotory when disturbed. There may be 
accesses of restlessness requiring restraint, and periodical 
inarticulate cries. Retention of urine is a common and 
sometimes a very early phenomenon, and should always be 
looked for. Examination may fail to reveal any appreciable 
alterations in the reflexes or in the motor system, and focal signs 
of this order may be absent throughout the course of the case. 
This is especially so in acute and rapidly fatal infections. 

In meningococcal and tuberculous meningitis, where the 
duration of the illness may be longer, cranial nerve palsies 
(squint, pupillary anomalies), papilloedema, variations in the 
tendon reflexes and signs of hemiparesis may develop, but 
are not essential components of the meningeal reaction. In 
tuberculous meningitis the knee and ankle jerks may become 
sluggish, and disappear, sometimes relatively early in the 
course of the illness. 

One or both of the following phenomena are usually present : 
Keriiig^s Sign, which consists in a reflex spasm of the ham- 
strings when the leg is passively flexed at the hip with the 
knee extended, and Bnidzinskis Sign, which is a sudden 
flexion of the arms and legs when the head is passively 
flexed. It would be wrong to suppose that these signs are in 
themselves conclusive. They must be considered in connection 
with the body of clinical evidence in any given instance. 

Pneumococcal Meningitis commonly complicates a pneumo- 
coccal infection elsewhere in the body, but may be primary 
in the subaraclinoid space. The cerebrospinal fluid is purulent, 
and may lx? too thick to flow through a lumbar puncture needle. 
It contains an abundance of polymorphonuclear leiicocytos, 
and the organism is also found. Tlie condition develops rapidly 
and coma soon supervenes. 

Pyogenic Meningitis. — The streptococcus and the staphy- 
lococcus are the organisms most commonly present, and usually 
reach the subarachnoid space from septic foci elsewhere. 
The state of the cerebrospinal fluid resembles that found in 
pneumococcal meningitis, staphylococci or streptococci being 
found in abundance. The presence and nature of the primary 
infective focus in cranial sinuses, middle oar, or elsewhere, 
indicate the origin and character of the meningeal infection. 

Meningococcal Meningitis (Cerebrospinal Fever) is described 
on page 65. 

Syphilitic Meningitis is dealt with under the heading of 
Neurosyphilis {vide p. 868). 



CEREBRAL MENINGES AND HYDROCEPHALUS 775 


Treatment. — ^The general management of the case consists 
in keeping the patient in a cool and darkened room. Iced 
applications to the head and venesection, or the use of leeches, 
are sometimes employed. The relief of pain calls for the use 
of such drugs as phenazone or aspirin, but morphia may be 
required. Until the recent introduction of chemotherapy 
with drugs of the sulphonamide group, acute meningitis was, 
except in the meningococcal variety, virtually always rapidly 
fatal. Now many, though not all, hves are saved by early 
oral administration of one or other of the drugs of this group. 
The scheme of treatment described in the case of cerebrospinal 
fever should be followed in other varieties of suppurative 
meningitis (see p. 71). The repeated lumbar punctures for 
draining cerebrospinal fluid formerly in vogue are now scarcely 
necessary. For severe headache, however, they may be of 
value and should then be used as circumstances indicate. 

Symptomatic treatment only is available in the case of 
tuberculous meningitis, e.g.y the relief of headache by drugs 
(aspirin with or without | to 1 gr. codeine with each dose of 
aspiriji) or by thecal drainage by lumbar puncture. 

Diagnosis , — The recognition of the presence and nature of 
an acute meningitis may be one of the most difficult of all 
diagnostic problems, because several acute general infections 
may be accompanied by symptoms hke those of meningitis 
(‘* meningism '’) as an incident in their course. This is the 
case in typhoid, pneumonia, acute tuberculosis, and also in 
acute poliomyelitis. In these circumstances lumbar puncture 
and examination of the cerebrospinal fluid is called for to 
provide the necessary diagnostic information. It was taught 
by Jenner that whereas in a true meningitis headache and 
delirium may co-exist, in the meningism of other infections 
headache disappears if delirium ensues. In true suppura- 
tive meningitis a turbid or purulent fluid containing large 
numbers of polymorphonuclear cells and the responsible 
organism will be found. In tuberculous meningitis a clear 
fluid in which a coagulum forms on standing, and in the 
meshes of which the tubercle bacillus may be found, and the 
presence of a pure lymphocytosis are diagnostic. In acute 
poliomyelitis a cleai fluid with a lymphocytosis and 
normal glucose and chloride contents is common, although 
polymorphonuclear cells are often present. In meningism the 
fluid is normal. 

Finally, the signs and symptoms of the primary infection, 
both in cases of meningitis and in those of acute infections 
with meningism, will help to a correct diagnosis, 



776 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


Hydrocephalus 

Any pathological process that interferes with the absorption 
of the cerebrospinal fluid will cause it to accumulate within 
the ventricles and to distend them. In infants this distension 
leads to separation of the cranial bones at their sutures and 
to enlargement of the skull, a condition known as internal 
hydrocephalus. 

It is theoretically possible for an excess of secretion over an 
absorption of normal degree to produce a similar state of affairs, 
but actually hydrocephalus is always due to impaired absorption. 

Such an interference with the return of the cerebrospinal 
fluid to the venous system may arise in any of the following 
circumstances : in the case of congenital anomalies of the 
ventricular system such as atresia of the aqueduct of Sylvius 
(cerebral aqueduct), or absence of the foramina of Majendie 
and Luschka (median and lateral apertures of the fourth 
ventricle) ; the blocking of the latter foramina by some 
pathological lesion ; or any block in the subarachnoid space 
which prevents the fluid from reaching the channels of absorp- 
tion above the tentorium. 

Cases of internal hydrocephalus have been divided into 
congenital and acquired. The former are due either to such 
a congenital anomaly as has been mentioned, or to an intra- 
uterine meningitis with formation of adhesions. There is 
reason to suppose that both processes occur. 

Acquired internal hydrocephalus results either from a 
meningitis in wliich the formation of adhesions has blocked 
the foramina in the fourth ventricle, the basiil cisterns, or the 
opening in the tentorium. Cerebral tumours are another 
cause of internal hydrocephalus when they are so placed 
within the skull or brain that they block the ventricular outlet 
either at the foramina of Monro (interventricular foramen) 
in the lateral ventricles, at the aqueduct in the mid brain, or 
at the foramina of the fourth ventricle. 

Most cases of hydrocephalus, if we include patients of all 
ages, are due to meningitis. Even during the brief course of 
tuberculous and pneumococcal meningitis, signs of acute 
hydrocephalus may develop, but in the case of meningococcal 
meningitis the patient may survive with pennanent hydro- 
cephalus. The internal hydrocephalus associated with tumour 
may modify the clinical course of the case, masking localising 
symptoms or aggravating the condition of increased intra- 
cranial tension ciased by the tumour. In such circumstances 



CEREBRAL MENINGES AND HYDROCEPHALUS 777 


a fatal issue is not long delayed, except in the rare instances 
of successful extirpation of the offending tumour and a 
restoration of normal conditions within the skull. 

Morbid Anatomy . — In congenital hydrocephalus evidence 
of congenital anomaly or of meningitis may be found, but in 
most instances a routine examination of the brain gives no 
information as to cause. The development of the cerebral 
hemisjjheres is always grossly defective, and their walls may 
be reduced to a membrane which is translucent. The skull 
is increased in size, and may measure over 30 in. in cir- 
cumference at birth, and the cranial vault may be reduced 
to the thinness of paper. The form of the skull is also 
altered, the frontal eminences bulging and the orbital plate 
being depressed. 

In acquired internal hydrocephalus the rigidity of the skull 
prevents the extreme degree of ventricular distension and skull 
enlargement seen in the congenital variety. Examination of 
the brain generally reveals the causative lesion, either an old 
meningitis or a tumour. 

Symptoms . — The extreme size of the skull in congenital 
hydrocephalus may render the delivery of the living child 
impossible, but such a child once successfully delivered may 
show progressive enlargement of the skull. In extreme cases 
it may be possible to transilluminate the skull, which is thin 
and soft. Mental and physical impairment of all degrees 
from complete idiocy and physical disability to mild mental 
defect and little or no phj^ical defect may be seen. Either 
mental defect or symptoms of spastic paralysis may exist alone. 

In acquired hydrocephalus symptoms of disordered function 
of the nervous system predominate, changes in the form of the 
skull being absent or moderate in degree. These sjnnptoms are 
those of increased intracranial tension : headache, vomiting, 
impairment of vision, and convulsions. The long-continued 
distension of the ventricles produces motor and sensory 
disorders duo to cerebral compression, motor disorders pre- 
dominating. These are of the nature of a bilateral spastic 
weakness with the corresponding alterations in the reflexes. 
Percussion of the skull in children with hydrocephalus result- 
ing from intracranial tumour may yield a ‘‘ cracked pot ” 
note. When tumour underlies the condition, death inevitably 
ensues. 

In certain congenital and acquired (meningitic) cases the 
process is not progressive, and when arrest occurs before the 
onset of serious mental or physical disability the individual 
may lead a comparatively normal life. 



778 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


Treatment , — Surgical procedures and repeated lumbar 
puncture have so far proved fruitless in all varieties of internal 
hydrocephalus. From what has been said of the pathogenesis 
of the condition it follows that purely symptomatic measures 
are all that are available, namely, the relief of headache and 
the control of convulsions, and such physiotherapeutic measures 
as may alleviate the motor disabilities. 


THE LOCALISING SIGNS OF DISEASE OF 
THE BRAIN 

The various ways in which a lesion may disturb the functions 
of the nervous system have been enumerated and described, 
and it follows from what W'as said on this subject that the 
nature as well as the localisation of the pathological processes 
may be expected to play a part in determining the character 
of the symptom-complex. Actually in those chronic and 
slowly progressive lesions which underlie the bulk of affections 
of the nervous system, the situation of the lesion is the deter- 
mining factor in the production of the symptoms. However, 
in certain acute diseases and injuries of the brain, irritative 
and «hock symptoms may appear, and their nature is largely 
determined by that of the pathological process, but apart 
from special circumstances of this kind, paralytic symptoms 
dependent upon the situation of the lesion are the rule. The 
following details may be given of the localising signs of disease 
of the brain : — 

In general, we may say that the more rapid the development 
of a focal lesion the greater the disturbance of function to 
which it gives rise. Conversely, a slowly developing lesion may 
be completely masked for a long f>eriod by the development of 
functional compensatory activities in undamaged regions of 
the brain. Thus a gunshot wound of the cerebellum produces 
immediately a gross disturbance of cerebellar functions, while 
a slowly growing tumour in this situation may reach a con- 
siderable size before unequivocal signs of cerebellar disease 
develop. 

Again, the period at which localising signs appear is of 
importance in assessing their value. Those which develop 
early have definite localising value. On the other hand, the 
steady rise of intracranial tension which accompanies the 
growth of a tumour within the skull causes widespread com- 
pression and resulting defect in the circulation, and hence in 
the function, of regions of the brain remote from the tumourt 



LOCALISING SIGNS OF DISEASE OF BRAIN 779 


The Signs of Local Lesions in the Cerebral Hemispheres 

Lesions involving those cortical areas which stand in close 
functional relationship with the projection fibre systems — 
motor, sensory, and visual — give rise to recognisable localising 
signs. There are, however, large cortical association areas 
which are silent in the sense that disease within them produces 
no focal symptoms, yet in the presence of general indications 
of a brain lesion this absence of focal symptoms may itself 
be of looahsing value as indicating the involvement of a 
“ silent area ” of the hemisphere. 

The Frontal Lobes. — Lesions at the frontal poles are 
frequently very difficult of recognition. The characteristic 
localising symptoms are mental and emotional changes. The 
patient becomes silent, apathetic, and lacking in initiative. 
Memory, judgment, and association of ideas are poor, and as 
a direct resiilt of this mental state the subject becomes 
indifferent to the calls of nature and passes urine and faeces 
wherever he may be. With extensive lesions, dementia and 
a condition of stupor may develop. Rarely, when there is 
pressure upon the olfactory bulb, there are anosmia and a 
feeling of irritation in the nose which leads the patient to rub 
his nose constantly. In certain instances the patient becomes 
talkative and embarrassingly facetious, and holds grandiose 
ideas. 

The Motor Area. — The excitable motor cortex occupies the 
ascending frontal convolution (precentral g>T*us) and the hinder 
ends of the frontal convolutions immediately anterior. Topo- 
graphically, the movements of the foot are represented at the 
upper end of the motor cortex ; those of the leg, trunk, upper 
limb, hand, neck, face, lips, and tongue in that order aa we 
follow the convolution laterally to its lower extremity (Fig. 18). 
Focal or Jacksonian fits commonly begin in one of three foci — 
the angle of the mouth, in the thumb and index finger, or 
in the hallux, according to the region of the motor cortex 
stimulated by the lesion. Such a fit begins as a clonic, or 
when severe as a tonic, convulsion in one or other of these three 
foci. It may remain confined to this focus, or the convulsion 
may spread to adjacent parts and may finally involve all the 
musculature of one side, or become generalised tluoughout the 
skeletal musculature. In the latter case, consciousness is lost, 
but in localised convulsions perfect consciousness may be 
retained. 

The spread of a Jacksonian fit shows an ordered march 



780 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

from its focus in accordance with the topographical representa- 
tion of movements in the motor cortex. A transient paralysis 
of the convulsed part usually follow^s the fit. 

One form of Jacksonian fit arising in this region of the 
cortex consists in transient powerlessness of a limb or part 
of a limb without convulsive movement. This may occur in 
one limb while another is convulsed. 


MOTOR CORTEX 



C’OKTICAL LOCALISATION 

The lateral aspect of the left hemisphere. The moffjr area cxtfmds over the 
ascending frontal convolution (precjentral gyms) and the cortical region immediately 
anterior to it. At the posterior end of the second frontal convolution (middle 
frontal gyms) is a region in which eye movements are represented. Both this and 
the motor cortex proj^er are indicated by stippling. The sensory cortex is more 
extensive and includes the ascending parietal (postcentral gyrus), superior parietal, 
and angular (inferior parietal) convolutions (after H. Head). At the foot of, and 
anterior to, the ascending frontal convolution, is the so-called motor speech centre, 
Broca’s convolution (B). In the first temporal convolution of the left hemisphere 
is the auditory word centre (Aud. W.), and in the angular gyrus the visual word 
centre (Vis. W.). The visual cortex just extends on to the lateral aspect of the 
hemisphere at the occipital pole. 



LOCALISING SIGNS GF DISEASE OF BRAIN 781 

Although movements of the eyes are not represented 
in the motor cortex proper, but in a cortical region 
lying anterior to it, irritative lesions of the motor region 
may produce in association with rotation of the head, 
a conjugate deviation of the eyes away from the side of 
the lesion. Lesions extending deeply into the substance of 
the hemisphere in this region may cause hemiplegia with 
marked spasticity. 

The Sensory Area. — This has its focus in the postcentral 
convolution, but embraces the surrounding cortex anteriorly, 
posteriorly, and laterally. The essential features of sensory 
change from a cortical lesion are : ( 1 ) the relative integrity of 
sensibility to pain and temperature, but a diminished power of 
differentiating various intensities of stimulus ; (2) impairment 
of localisation of tactile stimuli, a greater degree of defect in 
the discrimination of two simultaneous contacts ; and (3) a 
still greater impairment of the power of recognising the shape, 
size, and texture of objects held in the hand. With this 
last defect goes an inability to identify objects held in 
the hand ('‘ astereognosis There is, in short, a defect 
in spatial recognition, and this is liable to lead to dis- 
turbances in co-ordination in the affected hand and digits. 
It is possible that Jacksonian fits which are preceded by 
subjective sensations in the affected part originate in this 
area of the cortex. 

The Occipital Lobe. — The visual function is represented in 
the cortex surrounding the calcarine fissure (postcalcarine 
sulcus) on the medial aspect of the occipital lobe (vide Fig. 18). 
The right half of each visual field is represented in the left 
occipital cortex, the left halves in the right cortex. Further, 
central vision is represented at the tip of the occipital pole, 
peripheral vision at the anterior end of the visual area, the 
upper part of the field below the calcarine fissure, and the lower 
part above this. Irritative lesions of the visual cortex produce 
a visual aura in which the subject sees formless and moving 
coloured lights, often accompanied or followed by a transitory 
hemianopia. Destructive lesions of one occipital cortex will 
produce blindness of the crossed halves of each visual field 
(homonymous hemianopia), while partial lesions of one cortex 
may produce quadrantic hemianopia. It is characteristic of 
the blind retinal quadrants in occipital lesions that when a 
point of light is thrown upon them the pupil reacts, whereas in 
hemianopia resulting from lesions of one optic tract the pupil 
does not react on illumination of the blind part (Wernicke’s 
hemianopic pupil reaction). 



782 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Temporal Lobe. — Perhaps the commonest localising sign in 
tumours of this region is a crossed homonymous hemianopia, 
due to involvement of the fibres of the optic radiation which 
curve round the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle on their 
way to the occipital cortex. The upper quadrant of the 
affected field is encroached upon before the lower. Also 
in lesions of the left temporal lobe slight paresis of the 
crossed lower face may occur, associated with a defect of 
the speech function of the kind known as word deafness 
(see p. 817). Irritative lesions cause a Jacksonian fit (uncinate 
fit) in which olfactory and gustatory hallucinations are 
associated with a transient dimming of consciousness known 
as a dreamy state.” Sometimes, also, visual hallucina- 
tions of a complex order occur. 

Internal Capsule, Thalamus, and Corpus Striatum. — Hemi- 
plegia is the characteristic expression of involvement of the 
anterior limb of the internal capsule ; hemianaesthesia, and 
hemianopia of involvement of the posterior limb. The 
hemianaesthesia involves all forms of sensation. I^ions in 
this situation may also encroach upon the lateral nucleus 
of the thalamus. When the latter is predominantly affected 
the hemiplegia tends to be transient, sensory symptoms and 
involuntary movements of the affected limbs persisting. All 
forms of sensation over the opposite half of the body may 
be affected, but in the case of partial lesions the sense of 
position is the most profoundly affected form of sensibility. 
In certain cases the thalamic sjmdrome ” may be present. 
In this, in addition to sensory loss, there is spontaneous pain 
on the affected side of the body, with a peculiar over-reaction 
to painful or unpleasant sensory stimuli. 

The Brain Stem. — This part of the brain, from midbrain 
to medulla, contains structures of three orders : (a) long 

projection paths, sensory and motor, both of which are crossed, 
that is, have undergone decussation and run on the side of 
the brain opposite to that of the body which they innervate ; 
(6) cranial nerve nuclei which are uncrossed ; and (c) association 
nuclei and reflex centres which lie in the dorsal or tegmental 
part of the brain stem. Lesions of the brain stem may give 
rise to symptoms due to lesions of all or any of these three 
groups of nervous mechanisms. A characteristic feature of 
tocal brain-stem lesions is a crossed hemiplegia or hemi- 
ansesthesia, with a cranial nerve palsy (of lower motor neurone 
type) on the same side as the lesion. Thus as we pass down 
the brain stem the motor cranial nerves successively involved 
on the side of the lesion will be the third, sixth, seventh, and 



LOOALtSlNG SIGNS OF DISEASE OF BRAIN 783 

twelfth. The particular nerve involved will indicate whether 
the lesion be in the midbrain, pons, or medulla. A lesion in 
the crus cerebri will produce a homolateral third nerve palsy, 
and a crossed hemiplegia ; a lesion in the ventral region of 
the pons, a homolateral facial palsy and a crossed hemiplegia. 
Similarly, cranial nerve palsies may be associated with crossed 
hemianaesthesia. Lesions in the dorsal or tegmental portions 
of midbrain or pons will produce defects of vertical and 
lateral movement of both eyes respectively. Lesions in the 
midbrain involving the third nerve and red nucleus and 
superior cerebellar peduncle will produce a corresponding 
squint and diplopia, with involuntary movements and ataxy 
of the opposite side. Focal lesions in the medulla commonly 
prove rapidly fatal. 

Cerebellum. — Gross inco-ordination of voluntary movement 
without considerable weakness or qualitative alterations in the 
reflexes are typical of lesions of this part of the brain. In 
acutely produced lesions there is also marked flaccidity (atonia) 
of the musculature, but this is apparently not a constant feature 
of the symptom-complex known as cerebellar ataxy. The 
form assumed by this ataxy naturally varies with the particular 
clinical test employed to demonstrate it. Thus a variety of 
so-called components of cerebellar ataxy have been described, 
which for the most part have no independent existence apart 
from these empirical tests. The best known are as follows : 
Aionia^ a marked flaccidity and undue extensibility of the 
muscles as revealed by manipulation of the limbs. TMs, w^hen 
unilateral, may be an early and valuable localising sign in 
cerebellar abscess at a time when ataxy of movement is shght 
or inappreciable. Nystagmus, with a slow, coarse movement 
on looking to the side of the lesion, and a rapid, finer movement 
on looking away from the side of the lesion. Tliis abnormality 
of ocular movement is often associated wdth a difficulty in 
conjugate deviation of the eyes, more marked towards the side 
of the lesion. Adiadocliokinesis, or an inability to perform 
rapidly alternating [e.g,, pronation-supination) movements, 
when the single movement can be normally performed. The 
disability here arises from a spread of innervation to muscles 
which do not normally enter into the selected movement, and 
also from what is known as dysmetria, which is a tendency to 
overshoot the mark in carrying out some co-ordinated move- 
ment. This defect may be demonstrated in various ways. 
Another sign of diagnostic value may be elicited by asking 
the patient to extend both arms rigidly before him. If both 
limbs be then briskly tapped, or pushed, either downwards 



784 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

or laterally, the limb on the affected side will be seen to 
bounce or sway before coining to rest, the normal limb rapidly 
coming to rest. Asynergia, or a defective combination of the 
various components of a complex movement, for example, 
when the patient throws back his head he does not at the 
same time incline the trunk forwards so as to maintain his 
balance, and thus is apt to fall backwards. The gait is 
disordered in virtue of the defects of muscular movement we 
have already considered, taking on a reeling character, with 
a tendency to deviate towardi the side of the lesion. In 
unilateral cerebellar lesions the symptoms described are 
homolateral. Speech is also commonly affected, articulation 
taking on a staccato, spaced quality which renders it slow 
and laboured. Thus, the syllables of a polysyllabic word are 
pronounced separately as though each were a distinct word 
and are not normally fused into the single word. 

The Corpus Callosum. — An endothelioma arising at the 
anterior end of the falx or a glioma in the frontal lobe may 
compress and distort or invade the corpus callosum. The 
clinical picture arising in these circumstances includes a char- 
acteristic apathy on the part of the patient, who lies motionless 
in bed, displaying no initiative whatever, and speaking only 
when directly questioned. Full consciousness is retained. 
Urine and faeces may be passed in the bed, and there may be 
an associated apraxia (see p. 817). 

Region o! Third Ventricle (Third Ventricle, Pineal Body 
and Corpora Quadrigemina ), — The common lesion in these 
situations is tumour. It produces internal hydrocephalus (see 
p. 770) constantly. Compression of the superior corpora 
quadrigemina and the underlying nuclei of the third nerves 
cause loss of upward movement of the eyes, and disorders of 
pupillary reaction. In a few cases of pineal tumour occurring 
in childjen, sexual precocity is seen. Lesions involving the 
floor of the third ventricle and the infundibulum also 
give rise to drowsiness, obesity, and polyuria (diabetes 
insipidus). 

The Chiasmal Region. — It is commonly pituitary tumours 
which are responsible for lesions in this situation. These 
produce symptoms in virtue of (1) the disorders of pituitary 
function with which they may be associated ; (2) the com- 
pression and deformation of the optic chiasma they produce ; 
and (3) increased intracranial tension. These phenomena 
are considered under the heading of Intracranial Tumour 
(see p. 786), 



DISEASES OE THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


785 


INTRACRANIAL TUMOURS 

For clinical purposes we may include under this heading 
all tumours that, encroaching upon the cranial cavity and 
increasing its contents, produce disorders of brain function 
either by compression or destruction of the brain, or by both 
combined. Such tumours may arise in bone, in the meninges, 
or within the brain substance. They may be of the nature of 
true neoplasms or they may be granulomata. Of the former 
class some are primary within the skull while others are 
metastatic, the primary growth being situated elsewhere in 
the body. The brain is one of the commoner seats of tumour 
formation in the body. 

iEtiology. — Nothing certain is loiown of the genesis of 
tumours of the brain or its coverings, although microscopic 
examination will suffice to tell from what element a tumour 
has arisen. Here, as in other organic diseases of the nervous 
system, injury has been invoked as an adequate exciting cause 
of tumour formation. It is manifestly difficult to establish a 
relation between head injury and the subsequent appearance 
of a tumour, but on the whole it seems possible that in a few 
instances such an injurj’^ may excite the tissues to neoplastic 
activity. This is most clearly the case with the endothelioma. 

Pathology. — (1) Glioma is the commonest variety of brain 
tumour, constituting about 40 per cent, of all such tumours. 
Under this heading are included all growths which arise in 
glial elements. These differ greatly in macroscopic and in 
microscopic appearance, and in their rate of growth. The 
more the constituent cells of such a tumour differ from normal 
ghal cells in appearance, the more malignant in character is 
the growth. All are infiltrating tumours arising within the 
brain substance. Among the types which have been differenti- 
ated, the following are the most commonly encountered : 
(i) Glioblastoma, a richly cellular rapidly growing tumour 
leading to death within a few months ; (ii) Medulloblastoma, 
a rapidly growing, metastasising, cellular glioma commonly 
growing in the cerebellum in childhood ; (iii) Astrocytoyna, a 
diffuse infiltrating tumour which, since its margins are not 
visible to the naked eye, is always very much more extensive 
than macroscopic examination suggests. Often only the central 
degenerated portions of the tumour are readily visible. 

Though commonly thought to be single tumours all forms 
of glioma may be multiple, or may have several foci of active 
growth within the main tumour limits. No variety of glioma 



786 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

can be completely extirpated by the surgeon, and sooner or 
later recurrence is inevitable. A possible exception maybe 
made in the case of the cerebellar astrocyoma. 

(2) Meningioma. — This is also a common variety of 
intracranial growth. It arises in cells of arachnoid origin which 
lie in the meshes of the dura mater. It forms a firm, well- 
defined mass, rounded or nodular, and exerts its effects wholly 
by compression of the brain, which it does not invade or 
infiltrate. Although it commonly grows inwards towards 
the subjacent brain, it may also develop outwards, when it 
invades the skull, and may give rise to a superficial “ boss ** 
on the cranial vault which is visible from without. Common 
situations for the development of an endothelioma are the falx 
cerebri and the neighbourhood of the dural sinuses. It is 
usually a slowly growing tumour, and may give rise to focal 
symptoms before those indicating a general rise of intra- 
cranial tension. 

(3) Pituitary Tumour. — ^Adenoma of the glandular portion 
(pars anterior) and tumour arising in the pituitary stalk 
(infundibulum) are the common varieties of new growth. 
Sjunptoms of three orders may follow their development : 
neighbourhood symptoms, signs of increased intracranial 
tension, and signs of glandular disorder. 

Neighbourhood Symptoms. — The posterior border of the 
optic cMasma lies on the diaphragma seUae and is compressed 
by tumours in or above the sella. The resulting sjunptoms 
are bitemporal hemianopia and primary optic atrophy, one 
eye being usually affected before its fellow {vide Fig. 20, 
p. 891). 

Increased Intracranial Tension. — This rarely develops 
except in the case of pituitary stalk tumours, when headache, 
vomiting, arid papillcedema are common, e8i>ecially in childhood 
or adolescence. 

Glandular Symptoms. — The common adenoma (chromo- 
phobe adenoma) produces signs of hypopituitarism, obesity, 
regression of the sexual organs with amenorrhoea in women, 
and loss of sexual capacity in men. In chromophile adenoma, 
an initial acromegaly or gigantism appears, and later obesity 
and other signs of diminished pituitary activity may supervene. 
In stalk tumours signs of hypopituitarism are the rule. 

(4) Auditoby Nerve Tumour. — A benign encapsuled 
tumour may develop from the sheath of the eighth nerve, either 
as a solitary growth or as part of a generalised neurofibromatosis 
(von Recklinghausen’s Disease). It is a fibroblastic tumour. 
It compresses successively the auditory, trigeminal and facial 



INTRACRANIAL TUMOURS 


787 


nerves, the cerebellum and pons, and ultimately gives rise to 
hydrocephalus and increased intracranial tension, with head- 
ache, vomiting, and papilloedema. Its symptomatology and 
the sequence of events in its evolution are indicated by the 
above list of structures involved. 

(5) Metastatic Tumour. — ^This is commonly carcinoma, 
secondary to primary growth in limg, breast, stomach, or 
prostate. Rarely, hypernephroma may be followed by 
secondary deposits in the brain. 

Secondary carcinoma commonly gives rise to multiple 
nodules scattered throughout the brain, and also in some 
instances to a diffuse microscopic infiltration of the pia- 
arachnoid. It is the latter which gives to the clinical picture 
of secondary carcinoma of the brain the characteristics it 
usually shows : namely, an onset with mental symptoms 
(apathy, muttering delirium, and terminal coma), signs 
indicative of meningitLs (pain and stiffness in the neck, cranial 
nerve palsies, convulsive seizures), and signs of tumour 
(papilloedema, headache, and vomiting). There may also be 
progressive loss of weight. 

(6) Tuberculoma. — More common in children than in 
adults, this relatively rare lesion may occur in any part of the 
brain, but most frequently in cerebellum or brain stem. It is 
a rounded tumour, caseous at the centre, and marked off from 
surrounding tissue by a zone of hyperaemia. Operative attempts 
at the extirpation of tuberculoma are almost invariably followed 
by tuberculous meningitis. 

(7) Syphiloma. — Gumma is a very rare tumour. It is 
important to remember that a positive Wassermann reaction 
in the serum of a subject presenting the signs of cerebral 
tumour by no means indicates that the tumour is of this 
nature, or that anti-syphihtic medication is an adequate 
method of treatment. 

(8) Blood-vessel Tumours. — Rarely, venous or arterial 
angioma may occur on the surface of the cerebral hemisphere, 
and are sometimes associated with cutaneous nsevi in the 
distribution of the homolateral fifth nerve. An angioma gives 
rise to Jacksonian fits, and when arterial to a cranial bruit 
and the signs of tumour. 

Haemangioma of the cerebellum also occurs and produces 
the signs of a tumour in this situation. 

Symptoms. — These are of three orders : focal symptoms 
due to disturbance of function in the brain region immediately 
involved, general symptoms w^hich result from the general com- 
pression of the intracranial contents, and epileptiform fits, 



788 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

which cannot readily be placed in the first two categories, and 
which will be referred to later. 

In many cases the general symptoms of raised intracranial 
tension are the earliest to appear, focal symptoms appearing 
relatively late, sometimes indeed only as terminal phenomena. 
On the other hand, the signs of a slowly progressive local 
lesion may antedate the appearance of general symptoms of 
hypertension. 

Both focal and general symptoms are for the most part due 
to compression rather than to destruction of brain tissue. As 
the cram'al contents increase in bulk with the development of 
the tumour, first the cerebrospinal fluid and then blood are 
expressed from the skull. When the latter occurs, cerebral 
functions begin to fail. The so-called localising signs are the 
expression of such an interference with the blood supply of 
the region of the brain immediately involved by the tumour. 
Thus, the Jacksonian fits which may accompany the develop- 
ment of a tumour in the region of the cerebral motor cortex 
are in this way produced, since at a certain level of oxygen 
starvation the motor cells become hyperexcitable and discharge 
with the production of a focal convulsion. 

General Symptoms . — These are headache, sickness, failure 
of vision, and a slowly developing blimting of mental acuity 
leading ultimately to stupor and coma. Not one of these 
symptoms is constant, at least in the initial stages of the ill- 
ness. Headache is perhaps the most constant, though not 
necessarily the earhest symptom. It is often complained of as 
most severe on waking from sleep and after physical exertion. 
It may occur in paroxysms of great intensity. Its situation 
has no certain localising value. 

Vomiting . — This is most frequent in cases with severe 
headache and other signs of great increase of intracranial 
tension. It is usual to speak of so-called “ cerebral vomiting ’’ 
as not associated wdth preceding nausea and as projectile in 
character. These characters are by no means invariable, and 
the undue stress laid upon them has frequently led to a failure 
to recognise the significance of vomiting in the early stages of 
cerebral tumour. 

Failure of Vision is due to what is spoken of as papilloedema, 
that is an oedema of the optic nerve head As this develops, 
the edges of the discs lose their definition and become hazy, 
the disc becomes hypersemic and reddish in colour. I'he 
physiological pit is obliterated and the lamina cribrosa dis- 
appears from view- The veins become distended and dark in 
colour. Gradually the whole disc and the immediately 



INTRACRANIAL TUMOURS 


789 


surrounding retina rise into a hemispherical mound in which 
the emerging vessels are buried, and on the surface of which 
white exudate and haemorrhages make their appearance. 
Finally, the condition of “ choked disc ’’ is reached, and vision 
fails rapidly and may be lost. A secondary atrophy of the 
nerve fibres ultimately ensues, the disc shrinks again and 
becomes a white opaque object, with the traversing vessels 
entangled in organising exudate. The retina between the 
disc and the macula may become cedematous during the height 
of the neuritis and be thrown into tiny folds, spotted with 
exudate at their summits, and radiating from the macula to 
the disc in a fan-shaped manner. 

The failure of vision may be gradual, proceeding by an 
increasing peripheral constriction of the visual field, or it may 
be of dramatic suddenness. Once blindness has ensued, the 
pupils tend to dilate and to become immobile. 

An inconstant indication of raised intracranial tension is a 
slowing of the pulse, which may fall below 60 per minute. 
This is more commonly seen, however, in the presence of 
subdural haematoma or cerebral abscess than with tumour. 
As a terminal sign, periodic breathing may make its appearance. 

Fits , — Generalised epileptiform fits indistinguishable from 
those of idiopathic epilepsy not infrequently occur during the 
clinical course of tumour of the brain. Such fits generally 
indicate the cerebral hemispheres as the site of the tumour, 
but have no more precise localising value. Their clinical 
importance lies in the fact that they may precede all other 
signs and symptoms, and may occur as the sole symptom over 
a period extending to several years. The onset of single fits, 
or of status epilepticus in a middle-aged person who appears 
in other respects to be in normal health and has been previously 
free from attacks of the kind should always give rise to a 
suspicion of cerebral tumour. In short, it may be stated 
that such tumours frequently first reveal their presence in 
this way. 

All the symptoms so far considered vary greatly in intensity 
from case to case. Any one or more may be absent and, as 
we have seen, all may fail except as terminal phenomena. 
They tend to be most intense in rapidly growing tumours 
and in tumours situated in the posterior fossa of the skull. 
On the other hand, they are minimal in very slowly growing 
tumours and in aged persons. Cerebral tumours are commonest 
in relatively young and middle-aged adults, and it is important 
to remember that the clinical combination of headache and 
vomiting which may precede any loss of vision (though not the 



790 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


optic neuritis which ultimately produces this) may be observed 
in individuals whose general state of health appears good and 
who do not seem seriously ill. As a result there is frequently 
a failure to appreciate the possibly sinister significance of this 
symptom-complex, with a resulting neglect to examine the 
fundi of the eyes, and an unnecessary delay in reaching a 
diagnosis. 

Focal Symptoms . — The character of these has been dealt 
with in an earlier section. It has been pointed out that they 
may precede the signs of a general rise of intracranial tension, 
particularly in the case of slow-growing tumours, and it ms^y be 
said that the earlier they appear, the greater their localising 
value. Late in the course of intracranial tumour, when there 
are signs of a severe degree of general compression, focal signs 
may appear which have no localising value whatever, and may 
mislead the observer who does not take the time factor into 
account. 

In those cases in which a dangerous degree of cerebral 
compression develops in the absence of equivocal focal 
symptoms, mention may be made of a unilateral diminution 
or disappearance of the abdominal reflexes as indicative of a 
tumour of the opposite side of the brain. 

The Cerebrospinal Fluid . — On lumbar puncture the fluid 
may be found to be under considerable j)ressure (300 to 
1,000 mm. water), but otherwise normal except in those cases 
where the tumour comes in contact with the fluid, either in 
the ventricles or at the base of the brain. In these circum- 
stances a protein increase may be found. 

Age Incidence. — A word is necessary on this subject. Not 
only have the different histological varieties of tumour their 
favourite sites of incidence in the brain, but also characteristics 
of age incidence. 

During the first ten years of hfe, medulloblastoma in the 
fourth ventricle is the common tumour. Its cUnical picture 
includes the signs and symptoms of raised intracranial tension, 
unsteadiness of gait, and bilateral external rectus palsy. 

In the second decade, pituitary stalk tumours frequently 
reveal their presence. In adolescents, this tumour often 
produces the signs of raised intracranial tension, papilloedema, 
headache and vc'miting, together with signs of hyjK)pituitarism, 
but in swiultB primarj^ optic atrophy and bitemporal hemianopia 
are the rule. 

Astrocytoma occurs at all periods of life, in the cerebellum 
in childhood, and here and in the cerebral hemispheres in 
adult life 



INTRACRANIAL TUMOURS 791 

Endothelioma, glioblastoma, and auditory nerve tumour 
occur in the middle and later periods of life. 

Diagnosis. — The recognition of an intracranial tumour is, 
perhaps, most difficult in those cases where focal symptoms 
are present and there is no evidence of compression of the 
cranial contents as a whole, that is, no papilloedema, headache, 
or vomiting. In such a case the organic origin of the focal 
signs having been determined on the grounds detailed in the 
introductory chapter to this section, it remains to ascertain 
whether a tumour is responsible for their appearance. The 
feature of most importance in this connection is a progressive 
development of the signs and indications of successive involve- 
ment of more functions (i.e., of expansion of the lesion). Thus, 
while a sudden onset of hemiplegia probably indicates a vascular 
lesion of the brain, a slowly developing hemiplegia, especially 
if its progress be punctuated by focal or Jacksonian fits, is 
almost certainly due to tumour. 

In respect of the general symptoms, especially where these 
exist without focal signs, we have to assess the significance of 
papilloedema, headache, and vomiting. The combination of 
vomiting and headache, with or without giddiness, especially 
in a subject who presents no clear indications of a gastric lesion 
or arteriosclerosis, should always lead the observer to suspect 
cerebral tumour and to examine the optic discs. Papilloedema 
may be present for a considerable time before there is any 
appreciable failure of vision, and thus may have to be looked 
for. The diagnosis of tumour may present considerable 
difficulties when there is no other objective sign than papill- 
oedema. The high degree of swelling of the discs associated 
with tumour is not seen in other conditions, but the lesser 
degrees of swelling and the associated haemorrhage and exudate 
may closely resemble the neuro-retinitis of renal or vascular 
disease. This also may give rise to headache, vomiting, 
convulsions, or coma. Therefore, in the absence of focal 
paralytic signs the possibility of renal disease must always 
be considered when papilloedema appears. Chronic lead 
poisoning may also produce a clinical picture resembling that 
mentioned above. 

Abscess of the brain, which is in effect a fluid tumour 
and may be associated with considerable local oedema of 
the brain, may also have to be considered. The presence or 
absence of chronic suppuration in the cranial venous sinuses, 
and particularly in the middle ear, should therefore be deter- 
mined. A gummatous meningitis may. give rise to a clinical 
picture resembling that of tumour, but in this condition the 



792 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


swelling of the discs is rarely extreme, or the impairment of 
vision gross, and such paral 3 d)ic phenomena as are present are 
not severe except in the case of the cranial nerves. Neverthe- 
less, when the presence of a cerebral tumour is suspected, the 
diagnostic use of lumbar puncture is contraindicated if any 
high degree of compression of the brain obtains. The removal 
of cerebrospinal fluid allows the cerebellum to be forced down- 
wards into a pressure cone in the foramen magnum, this in 
turn induces a dangerous compression of the brain stem with 
its contained vital centres, and may lead to rapid and fatal 
respiratory failure. 

When localising signs are lacking, or even when the presence 
of tumour is suspected but cannot be confirmed, additional 
information may be obtained by one or other of the applications 
of radiography. A simple radiogram may reveal bony changes 
which indicate the presence and situation of the tumour, c.gr., 
deformation of the pituitary fossa in pituitary tumours, shadows 
cast by calcareous material in a slow growing tumour, lateral 
displacement of a calcified pineal gland, thinning of the skull, 
invasion of the skull by an endothelioma, or, in children, 
separation of the sutures. 

When these fail to provide information the injection of air 
into the ventricles (ventriculography) may show dilatation or 
displacement of the ventricular system. The injection of air 
by lumbar puncture (encephalography) will reveal abnormalities 
of the cerebral sulci, and finally the injection of opaque 
substances (thorotrast) into the carotid artery followed by 
radiography will reveal displacements of the cerebral arterial 
tree. Ventriculography and encephalography are not wholly 
free from danger, while the resulting radiograms call for skilled 
interpretation. They are, therefore, best xmdertaken by the 
neuro-surgeon under conditions that allow of immediate 
operation if any untoward reaction results. It is not necessary 
to describe the technique of these procedures here. Recently 
claims have been made that the electro encephalogram (see 
p. 879) may yield localising information of value when this is 
not otherwise obtainable, but the results of this are not yet 
sufficiently reliable for much stress to be laid uix)n it here. 
It may be said, however, that simple clinical examination 
often fails to localise a new growth within the skull and that 
the ventriculogram, expertly taken and interpreted, is not 
rarely necessary in the complete investigation of a suspected 
case of intracranial tumour. 

Course and Prognosis. — When allowed to run their course, 
intracranial tumours almost invariably cause death. From 



INTRACRANIAL TUMOURS 


793 


the moment when diagnosis becomes possible life is rarely 
prolonged for more than a year. With increasing compression 
of the cranial contents the patient becomes blind, and finally 
comatose, d5dng of respiratory failure. The last-named terminal 
phenomenon may occur suddenly from haemorrhage into the 
tumour, or from some other cause of sudden rise of pressure 
within the skull. ^ 

Rarely, a tuberculoma will become inactive, or a glioma 
cease to grow, but these events are exceptional. 

Treatment. — There is no cure for intracranial neoplasm other 
than its removal by surgical operation. When itTs possible to 
localise the growth, the attempt at its extirpation v^l depend 
upon anatomical and pathological factors. If it be by its 
situation accessible, is it of a kind that can be removed ? 
The glioma, from its dijBFuse infiltrating character, clearly 
offers little prospect of complete removal, and the attempt may 
involve gross damage to brain tissue which is still functioning, 
and a corresponding degree of physical disability for the 
patient. The meningioma and neurofibroma, on the other 
hand, when accessible are favourable for complete or partial 
extirpation, and the best results have been obtained in cases 
of this kind. 

When the tumour is inaccessible to the surgeon, irremovable 
from its character, or cannot be localised, palliative measures 
only can be adopted. These consist in the use of X-rays or of 
radium applications to retard the growth of the tumour. None 
of these means can be relied upon to give a permanent result. 
The two symptoms which may call urgently for relief 
are headache and failure of vision. For headache analgesic 
drugs may be tried, but in extreme instances morphia may be 
required, and its use in adequate doses is amply justified. 
For impending blindness a decompressive operation offers the 
only hope of relief. This consists in the making of a free 
opening in skull and dura over the site of the tumour when 
this has been localised, or otherwise over the right temporal 
or parieto-occipital regions. If such a decompression be not 
near the site of the tumour, the brain will tend to be forced 
through the bone defect, and considerable dislocation of tissue 
within the skull may result. Thus, while the relief of headache 
and the retention of vision may be obtained, the gradual 
increase of the tumour and the dislocation of the brain produce 
severe physical disability, and the existence thus prolonged 
may become purely vegetative. Therefore, in the case of 
unlocalisable or irremovable tumours, decompression should 
scarcely be regarded as a routine measure of treatment, but 



794 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


reserved for cases of uncontrollable and intolerable headache, 
or for impending blindness in subjects whose general condition 
enables them to appreciate retention of useful vision. When 
the presence of an intracranial tumour has been diagnosed, 
the possibility that it may be secondary carcinoma should be 
considered. The indications this may provide are described 
above (p. 787). 

CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 
I. Anatomy 

The frequency with which pathological changes in the 
arteries supphdng the brain give rise to both acute and chronic 
disease of this organ makes a brief statement of some of the 
main anatomical features of the cerebral circulation essential. 

Arterial blood reaches the brain by the two internal 
carotid and vertebral arteries. 

The Vertebral Arteries enter the skull by the foramen 
magnum and, meeting on the ventral surface of the brain 
stem, join to form the basilar artery at the level of the lower 
border of the pons. This vessel continues upwards to the 
level of the convergence of the crura cerebri (cerebral j>eduncle8) 
as they enter the brain stem and then divides into the two 
'posterior cerebral arteries, which at once sweep lateral wards 
round the crura to gain the inferior surface of the temporal 
and occipital lobes which they supply with blood, together with 
the marginal zone of the lateral aspect of these lobes. 

From the basilar and vertebral arteries, as they lie on the 
ventral surface of the brain stem, perforating and terminal 
branches enter the medulla, pons, and midbrain. There also 
arise on each side of these arteries the three cerebellar arteries : 
posterior inferior, anterior inferior, and superior cerebellar, 
which pass lateralwards and, giving off, x)erforating terminal 
branches to the brain stem as they traverse its siu’face 
end in a series of anastomosing branches on the cerebellar 
cortex. 

The Internal Carotid Artery on each side enters the skull 
by the foramen lacerum, and passing upwards on the lateral 
aspect of the body of the sphenoid bone reaches the neighbour- 
hood of the posterior clinoid process and the optic chiasma. 
Here, after giving off the ophthalmic artery, which enters the 
orbit, it divides into three terminal branches, the middle and 
anterior cerebral arteries and the posterior communicating 
artery. 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


795 


The Middle Cerebral Artery turns lateralwards from its 
point of origin, and as it traverses the anterior perforated space 
(substance) gives off its perforating or central branches, which 
pass deep into the region of the lenticular (lentiform) nucleus, 
internal capsule, and thalamus. The main trunk then enters 



Fiq. 19 

Coronal Bection of the left cerebral hemisphere, showing the central 
branches of the middle cerebral artery. The region of the lenticulo- 
Btriate artery, which is commonly the seat of rupture and of cerebral 
haemorrhage, is indicated by a circle of dots. 

the Sylvian fossa and finally emerges on the convexity of the 
hemisphere at the anterior end of the S^dvian fissure (lateral 
sulcus) and near the foot of the fissure of Rolando (central 
sulcus), where it breaks up into cortical branches which supply 
all but the marginal zone of the lateral aspect of the hemisphere. 
One branch runs as far backwards as the occipital pole, where 



796 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

it is said to anastomose with branches of the posterior cerebral 
artery. The anterior cerebral artery runs forwards and towards 
the middle line dorsal to the optic nerve and, entering the 
great longitudinal fissure, comes to lie parallel to its fellow, 
to which it is joined by the antorior communicating artery. 
Both anterior cerebral arteries then sweep forwards round 
the genu of the corpus callosum, and reaching its upper surface 
supply branches to the medial aspect of the hemispheres and 
to a narrow marginal zone of the convexity in frontal and 
parietal regions. 

Lying in the subarachnoid space at the base of the brain 
are the origins of the three cerebral arteries, and witli the 
communicating arteries they make up the circle of Willis 
(arterial circle). 

II. Pathology 

The various forms of arterial disease have been described 
elsewhere (p. 576). All that need be said here is that the 
common types of pathological change found in the arteries 
of the brain are arterio-capillary fibrosis, atheroma, sj^philitic 
endarteritis, and aneurysm. Apart from these lesions, acute 
cerebral vascular disturbance may be produced by embolic 
occlusion of an artery, the primary seat of disease in this 
instance being remote from the brain. 

Structural damage to the brain with associated disturbance 
of function arises when arterial disease leads to interference with 
the free supply of blood to any part of it. Such interference 
may arise from obhteration of the lumen of an artery, or from 
its rupture. In arterial occlusion, which may due to 
pathological changes in the vessel wall or to blocking of a 
healthy artery by an embolus, the region of the brain rendered 
ischseraic softens and undergoes necrosis. In haemorrhage the 
effused blood tears up the brain at the site of rupture and 
compresses surrounding tissue. 

1. Atheroma. — In elderly persons atheromatous changes 
in the arterial wall may lead to considerable distortion of 
the relatively thin- walled cerebral arteries, with narrowing 
of the lumen and localised thinning and dilatation. In these 
circumstances rupture followed by haemorrhage, or thrombosis 
followed by cerebral softening is equally liable to occur. 
In view of the distinctions often drawn between cerebral 
haemorrhage and thrombosis, it is important to emphasise 
that the antecedent factors are the same in each case, and 
that both accidents not uncommonly occur to the same 
individual. 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


797 


Rupture and Hcemorrhage in most cases occur on the 
lentioulo-striate branch of the middle cerebral artery, 
particularly on the left side, with the result that this branch 
has been named “ the artery of cerebral haemorrhage by 
Charcot. Whether the miliary aneurysms which stud the 
perforating branches of the middle cerebral artery are them- 
selves the cause of rupture is disputed, and it is thought 
that they may be normally present, rupturing only when their 
walls are damaged by degenerative changes. Another not 
infrequent seat of rupture is one of the perforating branches 
of the basilar artery in the substance of the pons. 

Factors tending to precipitate rupture are the cardiac 
hypertrophy and high blood pressure often found in those 
with diseased cerebral arteries. It follows from these patho- 
logical considerations that haemorrhage is an accident of 
elderly persons, being rare before the age of forty, and 
increasing in frequency with each subsequent decade. A 
familial incidence is sometimes noticed. Occasionally in the 
young subjects of chronic interstitial nephritis with an associ- 
ated high blood pressure and arterial degeneration, cerebral 
haemorrhage may occur. 

The effused blood, pouring from the ruptured lenticulo- 
striate artery, tears up the white matter of the centrum semi- 
ovale and the corpus striatum, and compresses the adjacent 
brain tissue. The blood may burst into the lateral ventricle 
or on to the siurface of the hemisphere, where it spreads over 
the convolutions beneatli the pia-arachnoid. Extravasations 
of blood may be of considerable size, rendering the affected 
hemisphere larger than its fellow and producing flattening of 
the convolutions and local oedema of the brain surrounding the 
clot. In small haemorrhages which the patient survives, the 
clot shrinks, and may be completely absorbed, its place being 
taken by scar tissue or by blood-stained fluid. At the periphery 
of the clot neuroglial proliferation leads to the formation of 
trabeculae, which form a wall to the cavity. 

On the other hand, when atheroma leads to occlusion and 
cerebral softening, any of the main arterie» of the brain or their 
branches may be involved, although even here the middle 
cerebral and its central branches are most commonly affected. 
The result of infarction of the brain is to produce swelling 
and serous effusion into the ischaemic region, which rapidl}^ 
softens, and within a few days is of creamy consistence. 
The softened area may be white or red, the latter when 
rupture of vessels at the periphery of the infarct has occurred. 
When the patient survives, the necrosed tissue is absorbed 



798 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

and its place taken by a cavity, single or multilocular, filled 
with clear fluid. 

2. Hyperpiesia (Essential Hypertension) and Hypertensive 
Encephalopathy. The condition described under these names 
on page 578 is not injfrequently marked by the development of 
conspicuous but transient disorders of cerebral function. 
These are grouped together under the name of Hypertensive 
Encephalopathy. 

Two forms of hypertensive attack have been described, one 
with and the other without signs of cerebral oedema. 

(i) With Cerebral (Ederna . — ^This is said to occur in child- 
hood, adolescence or early adult life. The subject 
may have essential hypertension without renal lesion, 
or may have acute or chronic nephritis. A sudden 
rise in blood pressure is followed by headache, vomiting 
and drowsiness. There may be convulsions, or hemi- 
plegia, or other signs pointing to some focal brain 
lesion. There is retinitis, sometimes with marked 
swelling of the optic discs, haemorrhages, and exudate 
on the retina. Recovery may take place in a few days, 
but the patient remains liable to recurrences, any one 
of wliich may terminate in fatal cerebral haemorrhage. 

(ii) Without Cerebral (Edema , — The patient is commonly a 
middle-aged or elderly subject with high blood j)res8ure, 
and the attack consists in the ap{)earance and rapid 
disappearance of such focal signs as hemiplegia, 
aphasia, hemianopia, or focal convulsion. There is no 
swelling of the optic discs, but hypertensive retinitis 
is commonly present. 

In both types, when uncomplicated, there are no signs of renal 
inadequacy and the blood urea remains within normal limits. 

In both types, also, spasm of the cerebral arteries has been 
invoked to explain the transience of what may be severe 
paralyses. There is as yet no conclusive evidence on this point, 
and sooner or later the subjects of hypertensive encephalopathy 
develop cerebral atheroma and succumb to cerebral vascular 
lesions. 

Treatment . — When signs of cerebral oedema are noted, 
venesection and the administration of hyj)ertonic saline are 
indicated ; 70 c.c. of the latter are given intravenously (15 per 
cent, sodium chloride), or the same quantity of 50 per cent, 
sucrose solution. When the case is less urgent, | oz. of 
magnesium sulphate in 6 oz. of water may be given iper 
rectum and repeated as necessary. 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


799 


3. Syphilis. — The common syphilitic lesion of cerebral 
arteries is endarteritis obliterans, involving the central branches 
of the middle cerebral arteries, and less commonly the deep 
perforating branches of the basilar and vertebral arteries which 
supply the brain stem. Arterial occlusion and softening of 
the affected region of the brain are the results of this lesion. 
Not uncommonly other syphilitic lesions of the nervous system 
accompany endarteritis, namely, gummatous meningitis at the 
base of the brain, or tabes. 

4. Embolism. — In this condition the morbid process lies 
remote from the brain, somewhere between the pulmonary 
veins and the aorta. Possible sources of emboli are the 
vegetations on the mitral valve in endocarditis with mitral 
stenosis. More often, however, in this lesion clots may form 
in the auricular appendix (auricle), and fragments may be 
dislodged and carried off in the blood stream. Finally, in 
atheroma of the aorta tiny pieces of degenerated tissue or of 
thrombi may be detached and form emboli. 

These emboli when they reach the cerebral circulation are 
commonly arrested, either in the main trunk or in one of 
the cortical branches of the middle cerebral artery, the left 
more particular! Here they produce an infarct resembling 
in appearance and results the infarction of thrombotic 
occlusion. Occasionally the anterior and posterior cerebral 
and the vertebral arteries are the seat of embolic arrest, while 
very rarely the internal carotid may be blocked in this way. 
When this occurs the ophthalmic artery is also deprived of 
blood. It is clear that the disturbances of function produced 
by embolism are absolutely sudden in onset. 

5. Aneurysm. — It is preferable to deal with aneurysms of 
the larger cerebral vessels separately, as they may^ arise from 
a variety of causes. The circle of Willis (arterial circle) with 
the truiis arising from it and the basilar artery are the usual 
seats of aneurysmal dilatation. In the case of the last-named 
vessel, syphilitic arteritis may be responsible, and the dilatation 
may reach such a size that the symptoms of tumour are pro- 
duced. In the case of the other vessels, however, other causes 
than syphilis are more important. Thus it is thought that 
certain aneurysms on the circle of Willis may be congenital in 
origin, occurring at points of arterial junction and branching 
where the walls are thin from developmental defect. The 
arrest of an infective embolus may produce a local inflammation 
of the arterial wall with resulting sacculation. Finally, the 
atheromatous changes described above may produce aneurysms 
in these regions. In children and young adults these aneurysms 



800 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

are m€dnly congenital, but in elderly persons atheroma plays 
a larger r61e in their formation. In most instances these 
aneurysms do not rupture, and give rise to no symptoms during 
life. However, they may leak, or may burst with considerable 
effusion of blood and rapid death. 

The blood thus effused spreads in the subarachnoid cisterns 
at the base of the brain, traverses the Sylvian fossa and spreads 
over the convexity of the hemispheres, gravitates downwards 
into the spinal theca where its presence may be revealed by 
lumbar puncture, may burst into the substance of the hemi- 
sphere, and even penetrate into the lateral, third, and fourth 
ventricles. Occasionally an unruptured aneurysm of the 
internal carotid artery gives rise to pressure symptoms. These 
are third nerve palsy (ptosis, dilated and immobile pupil, 
external squint), pain in the distribution of the second division 
of the fifth nerve, sometimes blindness in the eye on the affected 
side, and proptosis. This picture may be followed by the 
appearance of signs of subarachnoid haemorrhage. 

From this brief summary of tlic various arterial lesions in 
vessels supplying the brain, w’e may draw the following con- 
clusions : (1) that cerebral embolism is most common in young 
persons, particularly women, with endocarditis and mitral 
stenosis, or in persons with subacute infective endocarditis ; 
(2) that cerebral haemorrhage is a disease of elderly persona, 
particularly males, with atheroma, cardiac hypertrophy, high 
blood pressure, and granular kidney ; (3) that cerebral throm- 
bosis may occur in elderly persons of the type indicated under 
(2), and also in young adults, particularly males, who are 
syphilitic ; (4) aneurysms at the base of the brain are of 
variable astiology, and may be found in j)er8ons of all ages, 
and may give rise to symptoms at any age commonly by 
rupturing. 

III. Symptomatology 

A sudden onset with a “ stroke ’’ or apoplexy is a feature 
common to all extensive vascular lesions of the brain, be 
they due to haemorrhage, embolism, or thrombosis. When, as 
is commonest, the lesion involves the region supplied by the 
middle cerebral artery, the residual and permanent disturbance 
is hemiplegia. There is a close resemblance, therefore, between 
the initial and the residual symptoms caused by these three 
vascular lesions. It is often difficult to differentiate haemor- 
rhage from thrombosis at the time of onset, though cerebral 
embolism is, for reasons which will be given, commonly 
recognisable as such, but the hemiplegia is in each case 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 801 

identical in character. The features of the apoplexy due to 
each lesion may be separately described and a discussion of 
their clinical differentiation wffl be given later. 

(a) Haemorrhage. — In the case of intracerebral haemorrhage 
the seat of rupture is usually in the region of the corpus 
striatum, anteriorly near the caudate nucleus, laterally in the 
external capsule from the lenticulo-striate artery, or posteriorly 
between the thalamus and the lenticular (lentiform) nucleus. 
In every case the blood invades the lenticular nucleus and 
internal capsule (Fig. 16, p. 759). 

Rarely, premonitory symptoms are present, consisting of 
headaehe, vertigo, mental confusion, and disturbance of speech, 
with unilateral paraastheside and weakness. These are rapidly 
followed by the apoplectic seizure. In severe cases the patient is 
deeply imconscious, the face may be flushed, or less commonly 
pale, the body is covered with perspiration, and the pulse is slow 
and hard. Respiration is laboured and stertorous. Urine and 
faeces may be voided, and the muscles are completely flaccid. 
The pupil and tendon reflexes are frequently absent. In these 
circumstances death may ensue within a few hours, and is 
preceded by Cheyne-Stokes breathing and an acceleration of 
the pulse. The temperature may fall one or two degrees and 
remain below normal xmtil death, but when life is prolonged 
the initial depression gives place to a slight febrile reaction 
which lasts for some days. Vomiting sometimes occurs at the 
moment of onset, but convulsions are exceptional. Frequently, 
when coma is deep, blisters appear on the heels and other 
dependent parts. 

If death does not ensue, consciousness begins slowly to 
return after some hours, and delirium and restlessness may 
appear. Death follows, in at least 30 per cent, of cases of 
cerebral haemorrhage, within the first two days. While the 
patient is yet unconscious, signs of a unilateral lesioi> may 
be discoverable, and on return of consciousness a residual 
hemiplegia is revealed. 

This description applies to the common case of haemorrhage 
from the middle cerebral artery. In the case of certain other 
vessels the symptomatology may vary in detail. 

Pontine Hcemorrhage. — Apoplexy is the rule, and is 
commonly ushered in by convulsions, which may involve the 
legs more markedly than the arms. The signs of the nervous 
lesion are bilateral. The pupils are strongly contracted at 
the onset, but before death may dilate widely. Vomiting is 
common. A rapid rise of temperature develops, and before death, 
which is the rule, a temperature of 108® F. may be reached. 

51 



80^ DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Ventricular Hcemorrhage. — While usually secondary to 
intracerebral or subarachnoid hsemorrhage, primary efiFusion 
of blood into the ventricles has been recorded. Rapid onset 
and deep coma are the rule. There may be head retraction, 
intense rigidity of all four limbs, and periodical accesses of 
intense tonic and clonic spasm. Death ensues rapidly. 

Subarachnoid (Meningeal) Hcemorrhage , — The usual source 
of haemorrhage in this case is an aneurysm on the circle of 
Willis or upon one of the cerebral arteries in its neighbour- 
hood (vide p. 799). 

The haemorrhage may take the form of slight and recurrent 
leakages, or of massive and rapidly fatal bleeding. This may 
occur at any age, and seems especiaUy common in the third 
and fourth decades ; that is, at an earlier age than is the case 
with haemorrhage in the substance of the hemisphere. 

When leakage occurs there is intense occipital headache, 
stiffness of the neck, vomiting, and vertigo, occasionally 
epileptiform seizures. Consciousness may or may not be 
lost, according to the severity of the bleeding. A massive 
albuminuria may be present for a day or two from the onset, 
and is apt to lead to an erroneous diagnosis of renal disease, 
if its occasional occurrence with this lesion is not knowm. 
Signs of meningeal irritation ensue in non-fatal cases, and 
persist with mild fever for two or more weeks. Complete 
recovery is common in cases of this kind. 

When bleeding is rapid and massive, the onset with headache 
is rapidly followed by deepening coma and death. 

Other physical signs that may be observed are large sub- 
hyaloid haemorrhages in the fundus of the eye, oedema of the 
optic discs, pupillary anomalies, and squint. Hemiplegia is 
absent, but there may be bilateral extensor plantar responses. 

This type of haemorrhage is more common than is usually 
supposed, and for this reason, and on account of the relatively 
early age of the subject, frequently escapes recognition. 

In all cases of haemorrhage into the subarachnoid space, 
lumbar puncture reveals abundant blood in the cerebrospinal 
fluid. When the blood-stained fluid is allowed to stand, the 
corpuscles settle, leaving a yellow supernatant serum. Lumbar 
puncture is, therefore, a ^agnostic procedure of importance 
in cases of suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage. During 
recovery high cell counts (lymphocytosis) may be obtained from 
the cerebrospinal fluid, 

(6) Embolism. — The characteristic feature of embolic 
occlusion of an artery in the brain is the absolute suddexmess 
of onset of symptoms. These vary in severity and type 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 803 

according to the size and the distribution of the vessel con- 
cerned. .Emboli are most frequently arrested in the middle 
cerebral artery or one of its branches. When the main trunk is 
occluded, a large region of the affected hemisphere is rendered 
ischaemic, and the initial and residual symptoms resemble 
those due to haemorrhage from this artery. Convulsions may 
occur at the moment of onset, consciousness is instantly lost, 
and signs of hemiplegia are present. With occlusion of a small 
cortical branch, headache, vertigo, and unilateral paraesthesiae 
and weakness replace coma. Focal signs necessarily vary 
according to the region of brain affected. Thus aphasia, 
monoplegia, or a Jacksonian convulsion may be produced. 
Rapid recovery of function sometimes follows the temporary 
occlusion of such small vessels, but in the case of the main 
trunk of the middle cerebral artery, permanent and severe 
hemiplegia is to be expected. The anterior cerebral artery is 
very rarely involved, but the posterior cerebral artery not 
infrequently, with the production of hemianopia and sensory 
change. Rarely the internal carotid is blocked in this manner 
with the production of the so-called carotid hemiplegia, in which 
severe and permanent hemiplegia is associated with blindness 
of the eye on the side of the occlusion from blocking of the 
ophthalmic artery. In basilar embolism, signs of a brain-stem 
lesion with hyperpyrexia develop. 

(c) Thrombosis. — Far more varied than the clinical pictures 
of haemorrhage and embolism are those produced by athero- 
matous occlusion of the cerebral arteries. While the two former 
necessarily produce acute disturbances of cerebral function of 
absolutely sudden onset, it is not surprising from what we 
know of the diffuse and progressive nature of atheromatous 
degeneration of the arteries that it should give rise to both 
acute and chronic changes in the brain with corresponding 
acute and chronic symptoms. While the thrombotic occlusion 
of a large cerebral artery, the middle cerebral for example, 
will be followed by an apoplectic seizure, differing only in 
detail from that occurring in cerebral haemorrhage or 
embolism, the slow progress of atheroma in tiny cerebral 
arteries will be associated with a slowly progressive disturbance 
of cerebral functions, punctuated at intervals by more or less 
serious and transient “ seizures ’’ or “ attacks as some fresh 
and circumscribed region of the brain is temporarily or 
permanently deprived of its blood supply. These “ seizures ” 
may involve any of the known fimctions of the cerebral 
hemispheres according to the distribution of the artery 
involved. Thus more or less transient hemianopia, sensory 



804 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

loss, hemiparesis, aphasia, or mental confusion may occur 
in numerous sequences and combinations, each separated by 
periods of remission of symptoms and more or less complete 
return to normal. It is sometimes sought to explain the 
rapidity with which patients recover from these paral)d;ic 
manifestations by invoking transient spasm, “ angiospasm,” 
of the cerebral arteries. Apart from the fact that the muscular 
element is less developed in the cerebral than in the other 
arteries of the body, and that the former are therefore the 
less likely to be transiently occluded by muscular spasm, it 
has to be remembered that in the circumstances now under 
consideration the arteries are profoimdly degenerated and are 
probably wholly incapable of fluctuating variations in calibre 
for this reason. An alternative hypothesis is that fluctuations 
in blood pressure allow the flow through narrowed arteries 
transiently to cease, or to diminish so that the nervous tissues 
cease to function until the blood supply is adequately restored. 
If such restoration occurs before irreparable damage has 
ensued, then function resumes and paralytic manifestations 
clear up. In hypertensive encephalopathy {mde p. 798) transient 
focal signs, such as hemiplegia, may occur, and perhaps in this 
condition arterial spasm may play a part. 

Generally, however, this kaleidoscopic symptomatology of 
diffuse cerebral arterial degeneration is accompanied by a 
slowly progressive deterioration of the highest cerebral 
functions and by an insidiously developing physical disability. 
Finally, a fatal haemorrhage or thrombosis may terminate the 
patient’s existence, for it must be remembered that in atheroma 
we have a lesion which may result either in haemorrhage or in 
occlusion, and it is not uncommon for the subject of one or more 
thrombotic seizures to be finally carried off by haemorrhage. In 
the case of the middle cerebral artery, again the artery most 
frequently affected, the apoplexy and resulting hemiplegia do 
not differ essentially from those already described in association 
with haemorrhage. Certain differences in the mode of onset 
are, however, characteristic of thrombosis. There may be 
premonitory symptoms, both general and focal, and when 
occlusion is foally established, profound hemiplegia may 
develop over a period of one or more hours with little or no 
disturbance of consciousness. Not infrequently the subject 
retires to bed apparently in his usual health, to awake next 
morning fully conscious but with hemiplegia. In short, the 
disturbance of consciousness in thrombosis is apt to be less 
sudden in onset and less severe in degree than in a haemor- 
rhage causing a residual hemiplegia equally profound. Not 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


805 


uncommonly the onset is marked by a convulsion. In those 
cases where occlusion spreads proximally in a vessel from its 
distal end, gradually deepening coma and progressively 
increasing paralysis may occur. But in some instances a 
patient may pass from deep coma into a state of profound 
stupor with delirium, in which he may remain for several 
weeks until death ensues. On the whole, survival is more 
common in thrombosis than after haemorrhage , and the 
fact of survival in a doubtful case is evidence in favour of 
thrombosis. 

The residual focal symptoms which may follow occlusion 
and subsequent softening vary widely, according to the 
particular artery occluded. In the case of cortical branches, 
any of the known functions of the hemispheres may be 
affected. Occlusion of these branches of the anterior and 
posterior cerebral arteries is relatively uncommon except in 
the chronic cases above mentioned. In the case of the basilar 
artery the symptoms vary in detail according to the level of 
the occlusion and the extent of involvement of the lateral 
branches. The essential features, however, are cranial nerve 
palsies with crossed hemiplegic or crossed sensory disturbances, 
the so-called “ alternating paralyses.’" The posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery is occasionally blocked and a characteristic 
syndrome results. Blocking of the cerebellar branches of tha 
artery produces sudden acute ataxy on the side of the lesion, 
intense vertigo with forced movements, nystagmus, and 
vomiting ; while the cutting off of the blood stream in the 
perforating branches which pass into the lateral region of the 
medulla produces : (i) a crossed hemianresthesia for pain and 
temperature ; (ii) uncrossed symptoms referable to the fifth 
nerve (anaesthesia of the same side of the face), sixth nerve 
palsy (paresis of the extemus [lateral] rectus and diplopia), the 
glosso-pharyngeal-vagus-accessorius complex (unilateral paresis 
of the palate, hoarseness of the voice), and paralysis of the 
sympathetic (enophthalmos,"'^ defective dilatation of the pupil 
in shade). 

Slowly progressive disabilities related to arterial thrombosis 
have already been referred to, the essential lesions being 
multiple, recurrent, circumscribed areas of softening. Variable 
as the clinical expressions of this state of affairs may be, 
there are a few characteristic syndromes which may be briefly 
referred to. 

Psevdo-bulbar Paralysis , — There is generally a history of 
two or more “ strokes ” which may have been comparatively 
mild, and without loss of consciousness or profound hemiplegia. 



806 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

The symptoms are caused by bilateral lesions in the region of 
the internal capsule, though in practically all cases of the 
kind cortical thromboses in the distribution of the middle 
cerebral artery are also present. They are those of bilateral 
hemiparesis with the addition of marked emotional over- 
action of the facial musculature, forced and uncontrollable 
weeping and laughter, and a gross disturbance of articula- 
tion. Considerable mental deterioration is also present in 
most instances. 

Chronic Softening, — ^This may be taken to include the 
recurrence of thrombotic lesions, involving any of the cortical 
areas and producing the variable series of transient visual, 
sensory, speech, motor, and mental disturbances already 
described, together with progressive mental deterioration. 

Finally, a condition known as “ arterioaderotic muacvlar 
rigidity has been described in which the patient develops 
a diffuse muscular rigidity, resembling that of paralysis 
agitans, with a characteristic gait in which he takes very 
short and shufl3ing steps. There may be no imequivocal signs 
of pyramidal tract involvement. 

The Cerebrospinal Fluid, — Intracerebral haemorrhage and 
thrombosis may produce no other change in the fluid than a 
rise of pressure, though in the subjects of cerebral arterial 
disease and chronic interstitial nephritis an excess of protein 
may occur quite apart from the cerebral lesion. When after 
haemorrhage, blood reaches the ventricles, the cerebrospinal 
fluid may contain blood corpuscles, and when these are allowed 
to sediment the fluid may be yellow-tinged. A similar state 
of affairs may also follow extensive thrombosis, but on the 
whole such a finding suggests haemorrhage as the condition 
present. In subarachnoid haemorrhage, as is mentioned 
elsewhere, the fluid may be bright red from the onset, becoming 
clearer within a few days and yellowish in colour as the 
corpuscles disintegrate. 


IV. Hemiplboia 

The significance of the dual symptomatology of both recent 
and residual hemiplegia has a^ady been discussed in the 
introductory chapter to this section, and further clinicad 
details may now be added. 

In coma, the signs of hemiplegia serve to differentiate 
apoplexy from the coma of various toxic states, endogenous 
or exogenous. The cheek on the affected side blows in and 
out loosely with each respiration. The limbs on that side 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


807 


also may be more flaccid than those of the opposite limb. 
Sometimes this is visible as the patient lies on his back, 
because the affected thigh loses its contours and flattens out. 
The head and eyes may show “ conjugate deviation ’’ towards 
the paralysed side, that is, away from the side of the lesion. 
This is an irritative phenomenon, and transient in duration. 
Of even greater value than any of these signs is the presence 
on the hemiplegic side of an extensor or Babinski plantar 
response, and of unilateral absence of the abdominal reflexes 
on the same side. 

After consciousness is regained, the phenomena of hemi- 
plegia are fully revealed, and consist in a loss or impairment 
of imilateral volimtary movements. The face is paralysed in 
its lower half, the upper half being relatively little affected. 
The tongue is protruded towards the paralysed side, owing 
to the imantagonised action of the genio-hyoglossus (genio- 
glossus) of the normal side. 

The initial conjugate deviation of head and eyes towards 
the paralysed side gives place to a transient weakness, of some 
days’ duration, of movement of both head and eyes towards the 
paralysed side. The movements of mastication and ordinary 
respiration are intact. At first, the arm and leg may be totally 
paralysed. The limbs are flaccid, but the tendon jerks by this 
time are brisker on the paralysed than on the normal side. 
The abdominal reflexes are lost on the paralysed side and the 
plantar response remains of the extensor type. 

In partial hemiplegia the face is relatively slightly affected 
and the tongue may escape, while in the case of the limbs 
the arm is more severely affected than the leg. 

Chronic Residual Hemiplegia. — After the passage of two or 
three weeks the hemiplegia undergoes certain changes, con- 
sisting in a degree of return of voluntary power and in the 
development of spasticity or hypertonus in the limb muscles. 
Recovery may be arrested at any stage, and a severe degree 
of residual paralysis persist. The condition in the limbs is one 
of loss, partial or complete, of movements, and not simple 
paralysis of individual muscles. The movements which return 
earliest and most completely in the arm are those of elevation 
and abduction of the shoulder, of flexion at the elbow, and of 
flexion of the fingers and wrist. Extension at the elbow 
frequently remains feeble and restricted, while extension of 
wrist and digits and, still more, isolated movements of the 
digits commonly remain absent. Thus an individual with a 
grasp of fair power may have no other useful movement of 
the hand or fingers whatever. In the leg, extension at hip and 



808 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


knee and plantar flexion of foot and toes return earliest and 
most completely, and may be of sufficient power to enable the 
patient to stand at a time when flexion at hip and knee are 
feeble and restricted, and there is no trace of dorsiflexion of 
foot or toes. Indeed, these last two movements frequently 
remain permanently absent. 

The spasticity, like the return of voluntary movement, is 
selective in incidence, appearing in the adductors and flexors 
of the upper arm and in the extensors and plantar flexors of 
the lower, that is, in the muscles which become the strongest 
in the limbs. The spasticity, however, handicaps the activity 
of these predominant movements and renders them slow and 
clumsy. 

It follows that the hemiplegic subject takes up a character- 
istic posture when standing, with the arm flexed and adducted, 
and the leg extended and the foot plantar flexed. 

Another feature in this phase is the appearance of the 
Bo-cafled associated reactions.*' Any forcible voluntary 
contraction of the muscles on the normal side, or such semi- 
voluntary movements as yawning or stretching, give rise to 
sudden accesses of tonic spasm in the paralysed arm and leg, 
and this spasm leads to the taking up of a fresh attitude of the 
Umb while the movement evoking it lasts. Thus, in yawning, 
the arm usually rises up before the patient's face and the wrist 
and fingers extend. These activities are wholly involuntary 
and cannot be reproduced at will by the patient. The tendon 
reflexes in the affected limbs become extremely brisk, and the 
phenomena of knee and ankle clonus may appear. In some 
cases the abdominal reflexes on the hemiplegic side ultimately 
return, but the plantar response remains permanently of the 
extensor or Babinski type. 

Finally, in long-standing cases some degree of secondary 
fibrous change takes place in the inactive muscles and the 
posture may become fixed, but the leg never goes into flexion 
contracture in an imcomplicated case of hemiplegia without 
spinal cord lesions. 


V. Diagnosis 

The association of coma with acute cerebral vascular lesions 
renders diagnosis a matter of difficulty when the subject is 
found unconscious and nothing is known of the rapidity or 
mode of onset. Sudden onset, that is, apoplexy, is practically 
always indicative of a cerebral vascular lesion. 

l^e various causes of coma may be briefly discussed under 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 809 

the headings of (a) toxaemic, (6) post-epileptic, (c) traumatic, 
and {d) cerebral lesions other than trauma. 

(а) Tozasmic. — In all cases of this nature the coma is rarely 
as profound as after a cerebral haemorrhage and signs of 
unilateral cerebral lesions are wanting. In uraemia the subject 
may be of such an age and general condition as to make cerebral 
vascular disease probable. Hence the presence bf albumen, 
blood, and casts in the urine does not necessarily exclude 
vascular disease as a responsible cause. In ursemia, however, 
coma is not so profound, some response to stimulation can 
usually be obtained, the tendon reflexes are obtainable, 
muscular flaccidity and incontinence of urine or faeces are 
not present, and the plantar responses are usually flexor. 
However, within a brief period of a uraemic convulsion the 
tendon reflexes may be lost and the plantar responses may 
be of Babinski type, but these signs are bilateral and very 
transient. 

In diabetes the examination of the urine makes diagnosis 
easy. The reflexes are normal, unless a pre-existing diabetic 
neuritis has led to loss of knee and ankle jerks. 

In opium poisoning the skin is cold and damp. Respiration 
and the pulse are slow and feeble. The reflexes are commonly 
stated to be normal, but in this, as in other forms of narcotic 
poisoning, the tendon reflexes may be lost and the plantar 
responses of Babinski type. These signs when present are 
bilateral. In opium poisoning the pin-point contraction of 
the pupils is of diagnostic significance. In cholaemia and 
delayed chloroform poisoning the plantar responses are 
commonly of the extensor type, and in rare cases signs of a 
unilateral cerebral disturbance may be present. Hence in the 
absence of a history of previous symptoms and of mode of 
onset diagnosis may be difficult. 

(б) Post-epileptic Coma. — For the period of a few minutes 
after all generalised epileptiform convulsions, the pupils are 
inactive to light, the comeal reflexes absent, the tendon reflexes 
abolished, and the plantar respK>nses of Babinski type. These 
phenomena are transient, there are no signs of unilateral 
cerebral lesion, and certain features indicative of convulsion 
may be present, c.gr., tongue biting, incontinence, the presence 
of old scars of injuries sustained in previous fits. 

(c) Traumatic Cerebral Lesions. — In cerebral concussion the 
patient loses consciousness instantly at the moment of injury. 
The condition is one of collapse : low blood pressure, weak 
pulse, slow and shallow respiration, pale face, dilated pupils, 
and flaccid muscles. As coma passes off signs of irritability 



DISBASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

• the pulse is forceful, respir&tioix 
b«,om« d«,p», Md m,' tempeKtui. m.y ri« two OT 
degrees. Finally, consciousness is regained witn tne appear- 
anoe of headache. 

In extra-dural meningeal haemorrhage the concussed patient 
regains consciousness, and then, with the rise of blood pressure, 
haemorrhage begins, and the s3niiptoms of compression of the 
brain develop within the course of a few hours. The patient 
passes through a phase of cerebral irritation back into coma. 
As pressure rises within the skull, unilateral symptoms, first 
irritative and then paralytic, make their appearance : 
Jacksonian fits, followed by hemiparesis with corresponding 
reflex changes. Other focal signs appear according to the 
region in which compression is most severe. 

The development and clinical picture of chronic subdural 
hsematoma has been dealt with in the chapter on the 


menmges. 

(d) Non-iranmatic Cerebral Lesions. — The age and general 
condition of the subject may afford valuable information as to 
the nature of the lesion. Thus endocarditis and mitral stenosis 


are associated with embolism and occur in yoimg subjects, 
particularly in women. 

A mode of onset suggestive of cerebral thrombosis when 
present in a young adult, particularly a male, indicates 
syphilitic endarteritis. 

In elderly persons with high blood pressure, cardiac 
hypertrophy and signs of interstitial nephritis, either haemor- 
rhage or thrombosis may be in question. A differentiation 
may be impossible, but the mode of onset often enables a 
correct diagnosis to be made. 

As to mode of onset, embolism is characterised by absolute 
suddenness without prodromal symptoms. In haemorrhage, 
transient premonitory symptoms of the type already described 
may be present. Coma is deep, and the general appearance 
of the patient has been discussed above. In thrombosis, 
due either to syphilitic endarteritis or to atheroma, onset 
is less sudden. The hemiplegia may begin to appear before 
consciousness is lost, and epileptiform convulsions may usher 
in the development of the lesion. Coma may be absent, or 
may be transient and not deep. Recovery of consciousness 
and survival is presumptive evidence in favour of thrombosis 
as opposed to hemorrhage. Again, an onset during sleep after 
a day of fatigue is more common in thrombosis than in 
hemorrhage, which is sometimes associated with physical 
effort. A sudden onset of coma with death within a few 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 811 

moments is practically never due to a cerebral lesion, but to 
coronary thrombosis and cessation of the heart beat. 

The appearance of intense headache, followed rapidly by 
coma and death, is commonly due to subarachnoid haemorrhage 
from rupture of a basal aneurysm, and may occiu’ in otherwise 
healthy subjects of any age. 

Apart from primary cerebral vascular disease, haemorrhage 
into the brain may occur in a variety of conditions. Thus 
haemorrhage into a growing glioma may be rapidly fatal, or it 
may be a terminal incident in acute leukaemia and other 
.altered blood states. In certain acute infections such ais 
diphtheria, amd in septic conditions such as puerperal sepsis, 
embolism and thrombosis may occur. 

VI. Prognosis 

In intracerebral haemorrhage, death occurs in a large 
proportion of cases within forty-eight hours. Survival is more 
likely after thrombosis, but here ultimate prognosis as to 
life is influenced by the persistence of the factors which 
gave rise to the original cerebral lesion. In arterial disease the 
subject remains a precarious life, always liable to recurrent 
“ strokes.” In some cases of atheroma with thrombosis, when 
the patient’s mode of life is carefully regulated, a useful if 
restricted existence may be enjoyed for several years without 
recurrence of cerebral lesion. In syphilitic thrombosis, on the 
other hand, prognosis is determined by the thoroughness with 
which antisyphilitic measures are initiated and carried out. 
In the matter of recovery from hemiplegia, prognosis is 
gravest after hsemorrhage, since actual destruction ' of tissue 
has occurred. In transient occlusion, from thrombosis or 
embolism, complete or almost complete recovery of fvmction 
sometimes occurs, but it is usually found that the fine purposive 
movements of an affected hand are not completely regained 
in any but the most fugitive hemiplegias. 

In subarachnoid haemorrhage, free and continued haemor- 
rhage may prove rapidly fatal. In many cases the bleeding 
is less copious and of brief duration. In these circumstances 
recovery is common. The liability to recurrent bleeding is 
greatest in the fortnight following the original subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. In many patients recovery is followed by com- 
plete restoration to normal health and later recurrence does not 
occur, but it is impossible to estimate the expectation of life 
in the individual case. 



810 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


and restlessness appear : the pulse is forceful, respiration 
becomes deeper, and the temperature may rise two or more 
degrees. Finally, consciousness is regained with the appear- 
ance of headache. 

In extra-dural meningeal haemorrhage the concussed patient 
regains consciousness, and then, with the rise of blood pressure, 
haemorrhage begins, and the symptoms of compression of the 
brain develop within the course of a few hours. The patient 
passes through a phase of cerebral irritation back into coma. 
As pressure rises within the skuU, unilateral symptoms, first 
irritative and then paralytic, make their appearance : 
Jacksonian fits, followed by hemiparesis with corresponding 
reflex changes. Other focal signs appear according to the 
region in which compression is most severe. 

The development and clinical picture of chronic subdural 
hsematoma has been dealt with in the chapter on the 
meninges. 

{d) Non-traumatic Cerebral Lesions. — The age and general 
condition of the subject may afford valuable information as to 
the nature of the lesion. Thus endocarditis and mitral stenosis 
are associated with embolism and occur in young subjects, 
particularly in women. 

A mode of onset suggestive of cerebral thrombosis when 
present in a young adult, particularly a male, indicates 
syphilitic endarteritis. 

In elderly persons with high blood pressure, cardiac 
hypertrophy and signs of interstitial nephritis, either haemor- 
rhage or thrombosis may be in question. A differentiation 
may be impossible, but the mode of onset often enables a 
correct diagnosis to be made. 

As to mode of onset, embolism is characterised by absolute 
suddenness without prodromal symptoms. In haemorrhage, 
transient premonitory symptoms of the type already described 
may be present. Coma is deep, and the general appearance 
of the patient has been discussed above. In thrombosis, 
due either to syphilitic endarteritis or to atheroma, onset 
is less sudden. The hemiplegia may begin to appear before 
consciousness is lost, and epileptiform convulsions may usher 
in the development of the lesion. Coma may be absent, or 
may be transient and not deep. Recovery of consciousness 
and survival is presumptive evidence in favour of thrombosis 
as opposed to haemorrhage. Again, an onset during sleep after 
a day of fatigue is more common in thrombosis than in 
haemorrhage, which is sometimes associated with physical 
effort. A sudden onset of coma with death within a few 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


811 


moments is practically never due to a cerebral lesion, but to 
coronary thrombosis and cessation of the heart beat. 

The appearance of intense headache, followed rapidly by 
coma and death, is commonly due to subarachnoid haemorrhage 
from ruptme of a basal aneurysm, and may occur in otherwise 
healthy subjects of any age. 

Apart from primary cerebral vascular disease, haemorrhage 
into the brain may occur in a variety of conditions. Thus 
haemorrhaige into a growing glioma may be rapidly fatal, or it 
may be a terminal incident in acute leukaemia and other 
.altered blood states. In certain acute infections such as 
diphtheria, and in septic conditions such as puerperal sepsis, 
embolism and thrombosis may occur. 

VI. Peognosis 

In intracerebral haemorrhage, death occurs in a large 
proportion of cases within forty-eight hours. Survival is more 
likely after thrombosis, but here ultimate prognosis as to 
life is influenced by the persistence of the factors which 
gave rise to the original cerebral lesion. In arterial disease the 
subject remains a precarious hfe, always liable to recurrent 
“ strokes.” In some cases of atheroma with thrombosis, when 
the patient’s mode of life is carefully regxilated, a useful if 
restricted existence may be enjoyed for several years without 
recurrence of cerebral lesion. In syphilitic thrombosis, on the 
other hand, prognosis is determined by the thoroughness with 
which antisyphiUtic measures are initiated and carried out. 
In the matter of recovery from hemiplegia, prognosis is 
gravest after haemorrhage, since actual destruction ' of tissue 
has occurred. In transient occlusion, from thrombosis or 
embolism, complete or almost complete recovery of function 
sometimes occurs, but it is usually found that the fine purposive 
movements of an affected hand are not completely regained 
in any but the most fugitive hemiplegias. 

In subarachnoid haemorrhage, free and continued haemor- 
rhage may prove rapidly fatal. In many cases the bleeding 
is less copious and of brief duration. In these circumstances 
recovery is common. The liability to recurrent bleeding is 
greatest in the fortnight following the original subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. In many patients recovery is followed by com- 
plete restoration to normal health and later recurrence does not 
occur, but it is impossible to estimate the expectation of life 
in the individual case. 



812 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


VII* Treatment 

The recognition of arterial disease in an elderly person at 
a time when no manifestation of involvement of the cerebral 
vessels is present calls for some circumspection in the matter 
of treatment. Many persons in whom routine examination 
has revealed the presence of a high blood pressure are made 
utterly miserable in their remaining years by severe restrictive 
measures of uncertain value, accompanied by unwise and 
dismal forebodings on the part of their medical advisers. If 
the patient cannot be induced to lead a regular life and to 
exercise moderation in all activities without being put in 
perpetual dread of apoplexy, his medical adviser will probably 
prefer to leave him some measure of peace of mind, even at 
the risk that something less than an ideal regime of life may 
be continued. Once, however, definite indications of cerebral 
vascular disease have appeared, such as headache, vertigo, 
paraesthesiae, or other transient focal disturbances of function, 
or after a definite structural lesion, the patient must face a 
restricted life. Fatigue, excess of food or alcohol are all 
strongly contraindicated. 

Whether systematic attempts to lower the level of blood 
pressure are effective, or if effective of value, is doubtful. 
But factors fikely to cause wide fluctuations of blood pressure, 
the common immediate cause of both haemorrhage and 
thrombosis, are to be avoided. 

In both haemorrhage and thrombosis the patient must be 
kept at rest. In unequivocal cases of haemorrhage when there 
is a strongly acting heart, a flushed face and an incompressible 
pulse, early venesection may bo of value, from 10 to 15 oz. 
of blood being removed. But a soft, irregular pulse and the 
presence of any doubt as to whether the case is one of haemor- 
rhage or thrombosis strongly contraindicate venesection. 

Again, in cases of haemorrhage early and free purgation has 
been thought to be of value because of the dilatation of the 
abdominal vessels which it produces, and croton oil is used 
for the purpose. 

In thrombosis, the use of cardiac stimulants is indicated, 
and the administration of easily assimilable foods may be 
attempted. 

The treatment of subarachnoid haemorrhage depends largely 
upon the severity of the case. When consciousness is not lost, 
or only briefly, we may assume that no considerable increase 
of intracranial pressure is present, and therefore the diagnostic 



CEREBRAL VASCULAR DISEASE 


813 


lumbar puncture having been made, there is no indication to 
repeat the procedure. In these circumstances, the prime 
necessity is to keep the patient as quiet as possible and to relieve 
the headache and pain in the neck and back associated with 
meningeal irritation. For this purpose morphia may be 
necessary for several days, though milder sedatives may serve 
in some cases. When there is deep or prolonged coma, repeated 
drainage of the subarachnoid space by lumbar puncture may 
be indicated. The depth of coma and the pulse-rate must be 
studied to determine the frequency which is best in any given 
case. During recovery, restlessness and mental confusion 
may persist for three or more weeks and may require the use 
of luminal or other comparable sedatives. 

In all cases, the possibility of retention of urine should be 
borne in mind, and what appears to be simple incontinence of 
urine is commonly overflow from a distended bladder. 

Pulmonary congestion and broncho-pneumonia carry off 
many patients who survive the immediate shock of the cerebral 
lesion. This comphcation may be figuratively spoken of as a 
“ bedsore in the lung ” and like the bedsores which may 
develop elsewhere, is to be prevented by careful changes in the 
position of the patient in bed. 

Once the period of coma is passed and the presence of 
severe hemiplegia is revealed, the careful prevention of con- 
tractures and deformities must be taken in hand without delay. 
The leg must be kept extended, adducted, and rotated in, and 
the foot supported. The hand and digits must not be allowed 
to lie in a constant posture of flexion, which will invariably 
be the case unless active measures are taken to prevent it. 
Careful and gentle passive movements of the limbs may be 
begim as soon as convalescence from the cerebral lesion is 
established, but it is probable that premature active use of 
partially paralysed limbs may promote the development of 
spasticity. After the fourth or fifth week, however, if power 
is returning into the limbs, some active exercise is essential. 
Electrical stimulation at any stage, early or late, is strongly 
contraindicated. In transient hemiplegia where complete 
recovery is in sight it is not necessary, while in permanent 
residual cases it aggravates spasticity. 

For the hand in old spastic hemiplegia, active use of the 
fingers is the best form of local treatment, and exercises to meet 
the conditions present are readily devised. In such cases the 
degree of ultimate recovery depends more upon the aasiduity 
with which the patient carries out such exercises than upon 
any other factor, and massage is not an adequate substitute 



814 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


for them. When the fingers have regained some movement, 
the handling of dominoes and other small objects is a useful 
form of re-education. It is clear, however, that aU measures 
of the kind are of value only in subjects in otherwise good 
general health and with normal mental faculties. 


DISTURBANCES OF SPEECH 

Articulate speech and writing (and, to a less degree, gesture) 
are highly specialised forms of movement by which the 
individual expresses his thoughts. Spoken and written words 
are the symbols employed for this purpose, and like other 
movements, those of speech and writing are ultimately under 
the directive influence of sensory impressions. Some simple 
general ideas of the speech function and its disorders in disease 
may be gained by pursuing the analogy with movement still 
farther. 

Co-ordinated movement may be disordered by a cutting off 
of the sensory impressions which normaUy reach the cerebral 
sensory cortex, or by a failure to integrate these sensations 
when they arrive. In these circumstances the disorder of 
movement resulting is not in the nature of weakness or loss 
of movement, but is an inco-ordination ; movements can still 
be made, but they are wrong movements. If the subject’s 
eyes be closed, he is not aware of the disorder, and can make 
no attempt to correct it. 

When the efferent or executive side of the mechanism of 
co-ordinated movement is damaged, movements are weakened 
or lost. This loss will depend for its character upon the 
particular level of the motor mechanism which is out of 
order. The lesion may involve either the lower or the upper 
motor neurone with results appropriate to the seat of the 
lesion in each case. However, the lesion may involve even 
higher levels of the mechanism, the so-called eupraxic centres. 
When this happens there is no paralysis in the ordinary sense 
of the term, but the subject is imable to initiate certain 
purposive movements at will. 

Further, in the case of any given function it is always its 
most complex expression which is earliest and most severely 
damaged, as was* mentioned in the introductory chapter to 
this section. 

In speech we are dealing with a higher grade of cerebral 
activity than the mere performance of co-ordinated movements, 
because the auditory and visual impressions received when the 



815 


i)ISimBANCES OP SPEECH 

subject hears spoken, or sees written words, have acquired a 
symbolic meaning ; they have become the coinage of thought. 
Similarly, the movements of spoken and written speech, and to 
a less extent those of gesture, have also acquired a symbolic 
value imder the influence of these highly elaborated visual and 
auditory impressions. This investing of sensory impressions 
and of movements with symbolic signiflcance is the result of 
intellectual processes, and therefore there are anatomical, 
physiological, and psychological aspects of the speech fimction : 
anatomical in that the neurones concerned in the receptive 
and expressive functions described above are grouped in 
certain more or less well-defined cortical areas, physiological 
in respect of the specific activities of these neurones, and 
psychological in respect of the mental processes which are 
manifested in speech. Thought is possible without words, 
but for the expression and exchange of thought they are 
clearly essential. 

The groups of neurones concerned in the endowment of 
visual and auditory impressions with symbolic value, and 
those which initiate the movements of written and spoken 
speech, are all localised in the left cerebral hemisphere, in 
what for purposes of exposition are spoken of as centres. 
The so-called auditory word centre is situated in the first 
temporal convolution, the visual word centre in the angular 
and supramarginal (inferior parietal) convolutions, and the 
motor speech centres at the posterior ends of the second frontal 
convolution (writing) and third frontal convolution (speech). 
The latter is often Imown as Broca’s area. 

These cortical areas are intimately comiected by association 
fibres in the^subcortex, and together are included in a roughly 
quadrilateral region on the convexity of the hemisphere. As 
is to be expected, lesions involving the anterior portion of this 
region tend to impair executive speech functions predominantly, 
those involving the posterior part the receptive aspects of 
speech (see Fig. 18 , p. 780 ), 

In left-handed persons the speech centres may he in the 
right hemisphere, and lesions in this hemisphere may be 
followed by disorders of speech of the kind under considera- 
tion, while lesions of the left hemisphere produce no such 
disorders. Occasionally, also, a right-handed member of 
a stock in which left-handedness is known to be common, 
may show speech disorders after a lesion of the right 
hemisphere. Such an individual is said to have come from 
a “right-brained stock. “ The converse condition is also 
known to occur. 



816 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Morbid Anatomy and Pathogenesis. — Lesions of any nature 
involving these cortical regions will produce disturbances of 
speech function of a degree and kind proportionate to their 
severity and topography. The commonest cause of such 
lesions is atheroma of the cortical branches of the left middle 
cerebral artery, with resulting arterial occlusion and throm- 
bosis. Speech defects are therefore a frequent symptom in 
vascular lesions within the territory of this artery. Tumour 
and abscess within the same region will produce comparable 
defects. 

Symptomatology — Expressive or Motor Aphasia. — In this 
we have a greater or less degree of loss of the power of expressing 
thought in speech. The speech musculature is not paralysed 
and can still carry out all movements other than those of 
articulate speech, but the latter are lost or greatly reduced in 
number. The loss may vary from a loss of names (nominal 
aphasia) to a loss of all but a few recurrent utterances, such as 
“ Yes,*’ No,” or ‘‘ Thank you.” Such words as are uttered 
are perfectly articulated, except in very fresh lesions, when 
some dysarthria may be present. In nominal aphasia the 
patient can recognise an object held before him but cannot 
name it. Instead, he describes it, speaking of a pencil as 
“ what you write with.” In conversation he has to adopt 
similar periphrases. Simple questions on long-familiar topics 
may be answered correctly, but more complex ones involving 
the use of words in thinking (internal speech) may find the 
patient unable to express himself. It is sometimes noticed 
that a patient who is reduced to a few recurring utterances 
can, under the influence of emotion, speak volubly or even 
sing the words of a song, the expression of emotion being less 
severely impaired than that of thought. 

Lesions having this effect commonly involve Broca’s 
convolution, which lies at the posterior end of the third left 
frontal convolution and at the foot of the ascending frontal 
(precentral) convolution. 

When the posterior end of the second frontal convolution 
is involved, the movements of writing are impaired or lost, 
a condition known as agraphia. Here, as in the case of the 
articulatory muscles, all other movements of the hand and 
fingers may be intact. 

These two disturbances of expressive speech may be 
present simultaneously, or either may be found alone. 

Clinically, it is commonly, though not invariably, found 
that persons with motor aphasia cannot understand what they 
read ; they are “ word blind,” and this even in the absence 



DISTURBANCES OF SPEECH 


817 


of any lesion of the visual word centre. This symptom 
is supposed to be due to an inability of many persons 
to read with understanding unless they can “ say over ” 
silently what they read. The motor aphasic cannot do this, 
and hence is unable to pick up the meaning of the words 
he sees. 

Sensory or Receptive Aphasia. — Here we have a defect of 
comprehension of spoken or of written speech (word deafness, 
or word blindness) in the absence of deafness or blindness. 
The executive mechanism of speech in uncomplicated cases 
remains intact. Since auditory and visual impressions have 
lost their appropriate symbolic value for the patient, not 
only does he not imderstand what he hears or reads, 
but the activation of the executive mechanism is disordered, 
and he uses wrong words, mixes up the words in a 
sentence, and may talk an unintelligible jargon. To return 
to the analogy of movement, we may say that the patient 
can make speech movements, but they are wrong move- 
ments. 

Almost pure word deafness or word blindness may exist 
alone, but the two are more commonly present together. 
Similarly, in the majority of instances lesions are so placed 
as to involve both the receptive and the expressive parts 
of the speech mechanism, so that so-called mixed forms of 
aphasia are found. Lesions involving any of the so-called 
speech centres tend to interrupt association paths between 
the different parts of the cortical representation of speech, 
and so produce thesa complex disturbances. 

The patient’s comprehension of spoken and written speech 
may be tested by giving him oral and written orders of a 
simple character and noting his response. His powers of 
expression are tested by asking spoken or written questions 
which demand verbal or written responses, by asking him to 
name aM identify objects shown to him or to use them 
appropriately. 

Apraxia and Agnosia. — In certain cortical lesions immedi- 
ately anterior to the cerebral motor cortex, not only may 
motor aphasia or agraphia result, but there may also be an 
inability to perform other purposive movements to order, and 
this although the muscles concerned are not paralysed for 
other movements, or for the same movements when carried 
out spontaneously. For defects of this type, m which motor 
aphasia is included, the term apraxia has been coined. The 
subject of motor apraxia cannot carry out certain complex 
movements to order and cannot handle familiar objects, such 



818 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

as a pipe, a cigarette, or a key, appropriately, although he 
is aware of their nature and proper use. 

On the afferent side also not only may the significance of 
words heard be lost, but objects perfectly seen may not be 
identified by the subject, or are wrongly identified. This 
defect is spoken of as agnosia, and word deafness and word 
blindness are special varieties of agnosia. 

All these elaborations of received sensory impressions and 
the corresponding performance of purposive movements are 
functions of cortical cells, and hence the various expressions 
of apraxia and agnosia are seen in the subjects of cortical 
lesions. 

Dysakthkia. — In addition to the disorders of speech 
already considered, it is clear that paralysis or inco-ordination 
of the speech musculature wiU render articulation difficult or 
impossible. 

Such defects may be classified imder the same headings as 
other disorders of movement. Thus in spastic conditions of 
the musculature ; eg., in pseudobulbar paralysis and in spastic 
forms of chronic bulbar palsy the patient may be reduced to 
making wholly inarticulate sounds (anarthria) ; in general 
paralysis articulation is sliured ; in cerebellar disturbances 
such as follow lesions of the cerebellum and are seen in 
disseminated sclerosis and Friedreich’s ataxy, the articulation 
is of the scanning t}T)e. Finally, in lower motor neurone 
paralysis and in muscular diseases (myasthenia gravis, 
myopathy) defects of voice production as well as of articulation 
may occur. The features of these various forms of articulatory 
defect are considered under the heading of the diseases in 
which they occur and need not be further described. Their 
treatment is that of the causative condition. 

Stammerino. — This impediment of speech is of quite 
another order from the defects of speech so far considered. 
It is frequently inherited and associated with a nedropathic 
diathesis. It appears in early childhood, and is by nature 
allied to the tics and the psychoneuroses. It is, therefore, not 
due to any local disease of the neuromuscular mechanism 
of speech but to a disorder of volimtary co-ordination 
between the respiratory, the larj^ngeal, and the labio-lingual 
components of this mechanism. The general principles 
of treatment enunciated for the tics and psychoneuroses 
apply to the treatment of stammering, with the addition 
under trained supervision of breathing, singing, and reading 
exercises. 



DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


819 


THE CEREBRAL PALSIES OF CHILDHOOD 
Cerebral Diplegia 

Under this heading are grouped a number of clinical 
conditions characterised by signs of bilateral affection of the 
cerebral hemispheres dating from birth. 

iEtiology. — It is thought by some that agenesis or defective 
development of different systems of neurones, the latter 
occurring at varying periods of development, may be 
responsible for all the conditions included under this heading. 
It is probable, however, that disease processes during intra- 
uterine life also play a part in their production. 

The widely held view that cerebral injuries sustained during 
parturition play a part in the production of cerebral diplegia 
rests upon no sound clinical or pathological grounds. The 
child is frequently the first-bom of its mother, and when 
abnormalities of labour and delivery are present these are as 
frequently of the nature of precipitate birth as of prolonged 
or difficult labour. Further, there is no pathological evidence 
that birth injuries stand in any relation to cerebral diplegia. 
On the contrary, there is every reason to conclude that ante- 
natal factors are alone oi>erative. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Amongst the various pathological con- 
ditions foimd in the brains of subjects of cerebral palsies of 
congenital origin is atrophic sclerosis. The convolutions are 
shrunken, with wide intervening sulci. The whole or part only 
of the cerebral hemisphere may be affected. Microscopically, 
there is found a marked glial proliferation and defective 
myelinisation of the nerve fibres. 

Symptomatology. — The following clinical types have been 
described : — 

1. The Spastic Oroup, — There is generalised muscular 
rigidity, usually predominating in and sometimes confined to 
the lower limbs. These are rigidly extended and adducted, 
and may be crossed. When rigidity allows of their elicitation, 
the knee and ankle jerks are foimd to be increased and the 
plantar responses of the extensor t3q)e. The abdominal 
reflexes are generally retained. This condition is found in 
degrees of severity varying from slight rigidity and disorder of 
gait to intense adductor spasm and rigidity with “ scissors 
gait and an inability to place the heels on the ground. The 
arms may be intact and the patient’s mental development 
normal. This is the clinical picture of what is known as 



820 DISEASES OF THE NERVOtJS SYSTEM 

Little’s disease. In other cases the arms also are involved 
and there is a varying degree of mental deficiency and, 
sometimes, epilepsy. 

2. Bilateral Athetosis , — The limb and facial musculature 
is the seat of more or less continuous writhing movements 
(“ mobile spasm ”) which are aggravated and spread during 
all attempts at voluntary movement. The muscles of 
articulation and mastication may be involved. These 
phenomena are minimal at birth and tend to increase in 
severity later in childhood. There is a varying degree of 
associated mental defect. 

3. Choreiform Croup. — This is characterised by the 
presence of jerky, rapid involuntary movements of choreiform 
type, involving the limb and articulatory musculature. There 
may be no signs of pyramidal involvement, and in some 
instances no mental defect. 

Treatment. — The only cases for which anything can be 
achieved by treatment are those in which the legs are spastic, 
but the arms normal and the child’s mental development good. 
In these, it is sometimes possible by judicious tenotomy and 
carefully })lanned motor nerve division to overcome muscular 
spasm and contracture. When this has been done, the child 
may be educated to walk in a more normal fashion than was 
before possible. 

Further, some cases of the kind do undergo a measure of 
spontaneous improvement as they approach adolescence. 

Infantile Hemiplegia 

Rarely this is congenital in origin and due to the causes we 
have considered in connection with cerebral diplegia. When 
cerebral injuries (compression or haemorrhage) are sustained at 
birth, the resulting disability is a hemiplegia, and some cases 
of infantile hemiplegia arise in this way. The common variety, 
however, makes its appearance suddenly during the early years 
of infancy in association with one or other of the acute specific 
infections. In these circumstances its origin may be embolic, 
or due to haemorrhage or thrombosis, or, finally, to a localised 
focus of encephalitis. The infections in question are measles, 
mumps, scarlet fever, whooping cough, tyj)hoid fever, and 
poliomyelitis. Thrombosis of the superior longitudinal sinus 
may be the operative lesion in these cases. 

Symptomatology. — There is a sudden onset with generalised 
oonvulsions and coma which may persist for as long as 
twenty-four hours. In some instances the convulsions are 



SINUS THROMBOSIS 


821 


unilateral. A general febrile reaction accompanies these 
symptoms. On recovery the child is found to have a hemi- 
plegia of varjdng severity. Sometimes aphasia results. 
Subsequently there may be partial or complete recovery, or 
a varying degree of residual hemiplegia and speech defect. 
Involuntary movements of athetotic variety are liable to 
appear in the affected musculature. Other common sequels 
are mental deficiency and epilepsy. 

Treatment. — This consists in the treatment of the residual 
hemiplegia, which is conducted on the lines described in the 
case of adult hemiplegia. 

CEREBRAL THROMBOPHLEBITIS: SINT'S 
THROMBOSIS 

Thrombosis of the cerebral venous sinuses may occur in 
marasmic infants, as a terminal phenomenon, in association 
with middle ear suppuration and with infections of the face. 
Attention has recently been drawn to the occurrence of hydro- 
cephalus as a result of superior longitudinal sinus thrombosis 
in children with middle ear disease, and the occurrence of 
hemiplegia and other cerebral symptoms in women during the 
lying-in period or after abortion has also been correlated with 
thrombosis of this sinus, with or without accompanying throm- 
bosis of cortical veins. Growers suggested that some cases of 
infantile hemiplegia with an onset with convulsions and coma 
might be due to thrombosis of the superior longitudinal sinus 
and cortical veins. Cerebral sinus thromlx)sis in w-^omen during 
the puerperium probably arises in the following way. The 
pelvic veins have long been known to anatomists to com- 
municate with the vertebral system of veins, and this with 
the cerebral dural sinuses. If, as commonly happens in the 
circumstances named, the patient is wearing a tight binder 
and has thrombosis in the j^elvic veins, any fragment of clot 
detached from the latter may find its wa}^ not as commonly 
into the caval system of veins, but into the vertebral veins 
whence it may reach the superior longitudinal sinus. Here it 
may become attached to the sinus wall, or to the wall of one 
of the tributary cortical veins, where it forms the nucleus of 
a larger clot and may set up a local inflammation of the vessel 
wall (cerebral thrombo-phlebitis). Thus during the second 
week of the puerperium the signs and symptoms of this cerebral 
complication may develop. 

Again, in middle ear disease in children, superior longi- 
tudinal sinus thrombosis may ensue, and may obstruct the 



822 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

re-absorption of cerebrospinal fluid, via the pacchionian bodies, 
into the venous system. A hydrocephalus may thus be pro- 
duced. The carriage of infection by venous channels from the 
face may lead to cavernous sinus thrombosis. 

Symptomatology. — ^The symptoms peculiar to thrombosis 
of the different sinuses were fully described by Growers as long 
as fifty years ago, and may be summarised as follows : — 

Superior Ixmgitudinal Sinuses, — K condition of stupor leading 
to coma may develop, and there are headache, sickness, and 
papilloedema. When the cortical veins become subsequently 
involved there ensue convulsions and hemiplegia. K, as may 
happen in the case of lying-in women and by the mechanism 
alreMy described, the veins are involved earlier than the sinus, 
the onset is with convulsions, coma, and hemiplegia. Death 
may result, or recovery with residual hemiparesis or without 
any residual disability. Thrombosis of veins in the pelvis 
precede the cerebral complication. In children with middle 
ear disease, the development of superior longitudinal sinus 
thrombosis is indicated by headache and papilloedema, and 
sometimes by stupor or coma. 

Cavemcms Sinus , — ^This is commonly infective and the 
patient is clearly gravely ill and with a high temperature. 
There is proptosis, oedema of the eyelids, cranial nerve palsies 
(3, 4, 6), and some oedema of the optic disc. 

Diagnosis. — It is hydrocephalus (otitic hydrocephalus) 
associated with middle ear disease and the sinus and cortical 
venous thrombosis of lying-in women that constitute the main 
neurological problems of sinus thrombosis. In the former, 
the development of headache and other symptoms of raised 
intracranial tension raises the question of abscess, meningitis, 
or hydrocephalus. In the last named, the cerebrospinal fluid 
is under increased pressure but remains normal in composition. 
In meningitis and abscess there is usually some meningeal 
reaction (lymphocytosis, etc.) in this fluid. The development 
of coma, hemiplegia, or convulsions during the puerperium 
should lead the observer to suspect sinus thrombosis and to 
look for evidence of pelvic or femoral vein thrombosis. 

Treatment. — When there is reason to suspect thrombosis 
of pelvic veins after parturition or abortion the patient should 
be propped up in bed and the abdominal binder loosened. 
For raii^ intracranial tension the steps described on page 798 
should be adopted, and for convulsions those describe in 
connection with status epilepticus. For otitic hydrocephalus 
repeated lumbar pimcture may suffice, it being assumed that 
the original focus of infection in the ear has been dealt with. 



DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 823 


PARALYSIS AGITANS (PARKINSON’S DISEASE) 

Definition. — ^A slowly developing malady of elderly persons 
characterised by diffuse muscular rigidity, tremor, slowness and 
limitation of the range of movement, and by a peculiar stance 
and gait. In his original account (London, 1817), Parkinson 
described it as consisting of “ involimtary tremulous motion, 
with lessened muscular power, in parts not in action and even 
when supported ; with a propensity to bend the trunk forwards, 
and to pass from a walking to a running pace, the senses and 
intellects being uninjured.” 

iEtiology. — Nothing certain is known of the causation of 
this malady. It is rare before the fifth decade of life, and 
from this period onwards the case incidence steadily increases. 
Males are more frequently affected than females. This age and 
sex incidence are also those of cerebral arterial degeneration. 
In this connection it is noteworthy that a raised blood pressure 
is unusual in paralysis agitans, while gross cerebral lesions of 
vascular origin (haemorrhage or thrombosis) very rarely occur 
in the subjects of this disease. As is the case with all other 
chronic maladies of the nervous system of obscure aetiology, cold, 
stress of all forms, trauma, and infection have been invoked as 
causative or predisposing factors. There is, however, no con- 
clusive evidence that any of them stand in any other than a 
relationship of coincidence with the apparent onset of the malady. 
The view that trauma may determine the onset and site of 
initial symptoms has been handed on from writer to writer, but 
its reiteration is its most substantial claim to acceptance. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The essential lesions are found in the 
neighbourhood of the corpus striatum and subthalamic region, 
and they consist in degeneration and necrosis of nerve cells and 
fibres. There may be actual lacunae round the vessels. Tlie 
process is essentially a senile one. 

Symptomatology. — The onset is insidious and muscular 
rigidity is commonly the earliest manifestation. The normal 
play of expression vanishes from the face, which assumes a 
fix^, mask-like appearance. The natural swing of the trunk 
and arms in walking diminishes, the gait assumes a ghding 
monotonous character, and the arm on the earlier affected 
side ceased to swing, and lies adducted and slightly flexed at 
the side of the trank. The patient tends to assume an attitude 
of slight flexion, the head and back bent forwards, and the legs 
not i^y extended either in standing or walking. At first the 
affection of the limbs is unilateral, but usually within two 



824 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

years the limb musculature of both sides is involved. All 
movements become slow and restricted in range. The patient 
experiences difficulty in rising from a chair, in shaving, and 
in dressing. Usually within a few months of onset the arm 
first affected becomes the seat of a fine rhythmic tremor, which 
may be present when the limb is at rest and fully supported, 
or appear only when it is in action. Even then, in rapid 
movements, especially to-and-fro movements, it tends momen- 
tarily to cease. It is increased by fatigue or emotion. The 
leg is next affected, and the head or the lower jaw may be 
tremulous. Sometimes tremor appears first in the index 
finger, which then makes a “ pill rolling ” movement on the 
thumb. The pupillary and extrinsic ocular movements are 
intact. The tendon jerks may either be increased or they 
may remain normal. The abdominal reflexes persist intact, 
and the plantar responses also remain normal. There is no 
objective sensory loss, but the patient may complain of fugitive 
paraesthesiae and of pains in back and shoulders. Gradually 
with the increase of muscular rigidity the activities of the 
patient are progressively restricted. The gait assumes a rapid 
short-stepped character, the so-called festinant gait. The 
patient often breaks into a shuffling trot, and unless he can 
pull himself up is apt to topple forwards. Occasionally, 
also, there is a tendency to step backwards in the same way. 
These phenomena are known as propulsion and retropulsion. 
The patient has difficulty in changing his position when sitting 
or lying in bed, and may have to be moved at frequent 
intervals to relieve the numerous pains and discomforts which 
ensue from immobility. There is a clinical type in which 
tremor is the initial sjTnptom and predominates throughout the 
course of the malady. Rigidity is present in relatively slight 
degree and the Parkinsonian facies may be late in appearing. 
In such cases the tremor is more ample and disabling than in 
the rigid cases. 

Ultimately, the patient becomes bedridden and helpless. 
He tends to have periods of stupor, muscular rigidity renders 
mastication and articulation difficult, and speech may become 
unintelligible. Sometimes, despite Parkinson’s dictum, a pro- 
gressive mental deterioration sets in, and the last months of 
Ufe are passed in stupor and anarthria. 

When life is not cut short by some intercurrent affection, 
the disease may take ten or more years to run its full course ; 
but comparatively few patients survive so long, the majority 
dying of broncho-pneumonia before the final stage, with its 
ment^ hebetude, sets in. 



PARALYSIS AGITANS (PARKINSON’S DISEASE) 825 

The characteristic lack of expressional and of associated 
movements in the disease is largely, if not entirely, due to the 
muscular rigidity which damps down and finally extinguishes 
all but the most essential and purely voluntary elements in 
movement. In a few cases rigidity reaches an extreme 
degree, and tremor may be entirely absent, the so-called 
paralysis agitans sine agitatione. In other cases, again, 
tremor predominates and is free and ample in range, 
while rigidity, although always present in tremulous muscles, 
is minimal. 

Diagnosis. — The onset is so gradual that the disease has 
usually been present for a year or more before recognition. 
In its initial stages it is most readily identified by the careful 
inspection of the patient as he approaches the examiner. In 
these circumstances the fixed, mask-like facies, the short- 
stepped gliding gait, the immobility of the affected arm as 
the patient moves, and the slow dawning and passing of such 
expressive movements as the face may show, all go to make up 
a striking clinical picture, which is compounded of such slight 
deviations from the normal that a systematic examination of 
the patient may fail to reveal what has not been recognised 
at fimt sight. 

The absence of qualitative alterations in the reflexes or of 
objective sensory loss are negative signs confirmatory of the 
presence of the disease. 

A so-called Parkinsonian state closely resembling paralysis 
agitans frequently follows recovery from an attack of encephal- 
itis lethargica. The points of differential diagnosis are that in 
post-encephalitic paralysis agitans the patient may be of any 
age from early childhood onwards ; tremor of the limbs is not 
so early nor so prominent a symptom, but there is usually 
tremor of the closed eyelids and of the protruded tongue ; 
there may be anomalies of pupillary reaction and of ocular 
movement (loss of convergence and of accommodation) ; the 
skin of the face is greasy, and profuse salivation and dribbling 
are common. Frequently bizarre and complicated involim- 
tary movements of face, tongue, trunk, or limb muscles 
are present, or striking disorders of respiratory rhythm and 
force. In many cases a history of an acute attack of encephalitis 
may be obtained. 

Treatment. — ^The ultimate end of this fatal malady cannot 
be averted, but — at least in its earlier stages — some relief can 
often be given both to the rigidity and — ^though to a less degree — 
to the tremor. The drugs of choice are belladonna, stramonium 
and hyoscine hydrobromide. One or other of these is given 



826 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


in increasing doses until an optimal result is obtained, and the 
drug then continued at this — or a slightly lower — ^level of 
dosage. Hyoscine probably gives more relief from tremor 
than the otW drugs. It may be given by mouth in doses of 
from to Yhf gr. three times daily, and many patients get 
considerable subjective relief when this is combined with 
benzedrine sulphate. The tolerance of the latter drug and its 
effects seem to vary widely from patient to patient, and it is 
best to begin with 10 mg. twice a day (morning and early 
afternoon), or this dosage can be subdivided into four doses 
of 5 mg. over the first half of the day period. Some subjects 
do well on larger doses. Stramonium and belladonna may 
be given as tinctures (10 minims rising to 30 minims, t.d.s.) 
or in pill form. 

Pains and sleeplessness can be treated as they arise. The 
subjects of paralysis do not tolerate the barbiturates veil 
except in small doses. 

In the final stage of extreme rigidity and immobility the 
patient is bedridden, and usually becomes extremely thin, and 
requires to have everything done for him. 


HUNTINGTON’S CHOREA 

Huntington’s chorea is a rare malady of middle-aged and 
elderly persons, of slow onset, characterised by the development 
of choreiform movements of head and neck, face, tongue, and 
limbs, and also by a progressive dementia. It is a heredo- 
familial disease, may be traced through several generations, 
and may occur in several members of a single generation. The 
movements resemble those of rheumatic chorea, but are usually 
not quite so sudden and jerky. The facial involvement may 
be severe and articulation may become unintelligible. The 
dementia is progressive. Ma^acal outbursts and suicidal 
tendencies are common. 

The disease runs a steadily progressive course and recovery 
is unknown. When no heredo-familial factors are present, we may 
speak of the condition as chronic progressive, or senile, chorea. 

Under the name of “ apoplectic chorea ” we may mention 
a sequel of hssmorrhage into the region of the substantia 
nigra and corpus subthalamicum (subthalamic nucleus). The 
apoplectic seizure is followed by the development of intract- 
able and severe choreiform movements of strictly unilateral 
distribution. Death from exhaustion after some weeks is 
the usual tennination. 



CEREBRO-MACULAR DISEASE 


827 


HEPATO LENTICULAR DEGENERATION 

Progressive LerUicvIar Degeneration ,. — ^This rare and fatal 
malady is characterised by the progressive development in 
adolescents or yoimg adults of widespread tremor and rigidity 
of the musculature, defects of articulation and deglutition, 
spasmodic weeping and laughing, a slight degree of dementia, 
and by the absence in uncomplicated cases of any true paralysis 
or of those changes in the reflexes associated with pyramidal 
system lesions. Pathologically, the nervous lesion consists in 
a bilaterally symmetrical degeneration of the lenticular (lenti- 
form) nuclei, and sometimes of other regions of the brain, and 
there is in addition portal cirrhosis of the liver. There may 
also be a deposit of pigment granules at the periphery of the 
cornea. It may occur in more than one member of a family. 
Its course is uninfluenced by treatment. It seems probable 
that the hepatic lesion precedes that of the brain. 


CEREBRO-MACULAR DISEASE 
(Amaurotic Idiocy, Tay-Sachs Disease) 

A rare familial form of progressive cerebral degeneration, 
occurring chiefly in Russian Jews, and characterised by 
progressive paralysis and mental deterioration and by a 
peculiar form of macular change. Its causation is unknown. 

Symptomatology. — ^The chfld is normal at birth and for 
some months subsequently. It then begins to become pro- 
gressively weaker and apathetic and to show signs of visual 
impairment. Later, generalised muscular rigidity and blind- 
ness ensue, followed finally by coma, with or without con- 
vulsions, and death. Ophthalmoscopic examination reveals 
primary optic atrophy with a “ cherrj^-red spot ” surrounded 
by a pale halo at the macula. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Microscopic examination of the brain 
reveals extensive degeneration changes in the nerve cells and 
their processes, with a glial reaction. The retinal ganglion 
cells are similarly afiected. 

Other comparable familial forms (juvenile and adolescent) 
of progressive cerebral degeneration, with and without 
macular changes, and not confined to the Jewish race, 
have also been described. There is no treatment for any of 
these conditions, 



828 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


TOXIC ENCEPHALITIS 

Acute inflammation of the brain occurs under varying 
conditions, and it may be suppurative or non -suppurative. 
The suppurative variety is dealt with below under the 
heading of cerebral abscess. Of the non -suppurative variety 
almost all cases are examples of virus infection of the 
nervous system, and these are dealt with under that heading 
on page 842. There remain for consideration here rare cases 
of toxic origin. 

Wernicke's Polioencephalitis Hcemorrhagica Superior. — In 
this the symptoms are referable to a lesion of the peri-aqueductal 
grey matter ; viz., ocular palsies, drowsiness and alternating 
paralyses. It is probable that this condition is a degenerative 
rather than an inflammatory process. There is a marked 
proliferation of small blood vessels, from which minute haemor- 
rhages occur, and also nerve cell degeneration and glial 
proliferation. 

After the administration of the salvarsan products an 
acutely fatal encephalitis with convulsions and coma may ensue 
in cases of cerebral syphilis. In carbon monoxide poisoning 
also there may be cerebral lesions involving especially the 
globus pallidus and areas of demyelinisation of nerve fibres in 
the white matter. 

Lead Encephalopathy may also be grouped in this category, 
but it is described on page 953. 


CEREBRAL ABSCESS 
{Suppurative Encephalitis) 

Pyogenic organisms may reach the brain by direct implanta- 
tion in cases of injury to the skull and meninges, by direct 
spread from a local focus of suppuration, or by the blood 
stream from some remote focus of infection. 

Traumatic Abscess, though frequent in gunshot wounds of 
the skull, is relatively uncommon in civil practice. Single 
or multiple abscesses develop in the track of the infective 
material. 

Local Suppuration in the skull is the common cause of 
abscess of the brain, and more than half the total number 
of abscesses seen arise in association with chronic otitis media. 
Caries of the petrous bone is the common antecedent of in- 
fection of the brain, and a cholesteatoma is found in most 



CEREBRAL ABSCESS 829 

cases. Occasionally frontal sinus disease may result in abscess 
formation in the frontal pole of the hemisphere. 

In the case of otitis media, either the temporal lobe (two- 
thirds of the cases) or the anterior part of the cerebellar hemis- 
phere (one-third of the cases) is infected. In the former 
instance the tegmen tympani is carious, and a definite track 
may be traceable from the middle ear through the bone and 
dura into the brain. Occasionally a small abscess forms between 
dura and brain, but as a rule no definite track exists, and 
there is a thin layer of intact brain on the under surface of the 
lobe between abscess and meninges. When infection spreads 
through the posterior wall of the mastoid (tympanic) antrum, 
the cerebellum is the seat of abscess formation. 

Pysemic Abscess. — In the majority of cases of pyaemia the 
brain is not infected, but there is a peculiar tendency to the 
formation of a single abscess in either frontal or occipital lobe 
in cases of chronic suppuration within the thorax (chronic 
empyema, bronchiectasis), and this is then usually the sole 
pyaemic manifestation. Surgical intervention in a case of 
cL^onic empyema is sometimes the immediate cause of abscess 
formation in the brain. 

When the suppurative process develops very rapidly, the 
brain softens and becomes diffluent, suppuration reaches the 
ventricles or the surface, and death ensues within a few days. 
No definite circumscribing wall can be found to the necrotic 
purulent material. Clinically, a diagnosis of abscess cannot be 
made with a process so rapid, and symptoms of acute lepto- 
meningitis may dominate the picture. With a more slowly 
developing process an abscess cavity forms, and in from five 
to six weeks a definite enclosing cai)sule surrounds it. In 
long-standing cases this capsule may be extremely tough and 
thick, so as to allow of the abscess being removed intact. 
Further, such cases may run a long and latent course, the 
abscess suddenly bursting on to the surface of the brain or 
into the ventricles after a period of one or more years. This 
has been especially the case in abscesses forming in the track 
of a bullet. 

Symptomatology. — As has been already mentioned, acute 
spreading suppuration so rapidly causes death with symptoms 
of an acute meningitis that a diagnosis of abscess cannot be 
made. In chronic cases a circumscribing capsule tends to 
localise the suppuration, and a weU-defined abscess forms. It 
may give rise to three orders of symptoms : those of suppura- 
tion, those of a rise of intracranial tension, and focal signs 
determined by the seat of the lesion. Indications of a general 



830 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

septic process may be wanting, but when present consist of 
one or more rigors, a febrile reaction, and a leucocytosis in 
the blood. Pallor and progressive wasting may also occur 
in long-standing cases. 

The symptoms of raised intracranial tension have cJready 
been dealt with under the heading of “ Cerebral Tumour,’’ 
and here, as in the case of tumour, depend for their intensity 
and time of appearance upon the rate of development of the 
abscess. In certain chronic abscesses there may be a period 
of over a year in which no symptoms whatever are present. 
In these circumstances, the bursting of the abscess into 
ventricles or on the surface of the brain is the first indication 
of abscess, and gives rise to acute and rapidly fatal symptoms : 
convulsions, coma, and death. 

In the common case, that of otitic abscess, there is a period 
of from one to several weeks during which no definite symptoms 
are noticed. Then, headache, apathy passing into drowsiness, 
a subnormal temperature of about 97® F., and a slow pulse 
of from sixty to forty per minute indicate the slow growth of 
an encapsul^ abscess. 

Such a sequence of events in a case of chronic otitis media, 
or frontal sinus disease, should early give rise to a suspicion of 
abscess. In the initial phases, there is not often a complaint 
of failing vision, but examination will reveal an engorgement 
of the disc with haziness of its edges, or a frank papilloedema. 
Vomiting may occur, but is not prominent in every case. 
Focal sjmiptoms in the case of temporo-sphenoidal abscess 
are determined by the spread of pressure to adjacent regions 
of the brain. Thus pressure upwards wiU involve the lower 
end of the cerebral motor cortex and produce paresis of the 
lower face ; pressure mesially will affect the pyramidal system 
and produce hemiparesis, in which the leg may be more definitely 
weak than the arm or face. Occasionally signs of midbrain 
compression are seen : paralytic dilatation of the homolateral 
pupil, ptosis, and squint with diplopia. When the left temporal 
lobe is involved, the disturbance of the speech function known 
as word-deafness may be present. An isolated external lateral 
rectus weakness with trigeminal pain in children (Oradmigo'a 
syndrome) with mastoid disease may be due to a localised 
meningitis over the petrous bone (petrocitis), and does not 
necessarily indicate abscess. 

In cerebellar abscess the relatively small size of the posterior 
fossa of the skull tends to the early development of both 
genera] and focal symptoms. The most important of the latter 
are 



CEREBRAL ABSCESS 


831 


1. Nystagmus. — ^This is most distinct when the eyes are 
turned towards the side of the lesion, and then consists of a 
slow ample movement to the side of the lesion, with a quick 
return. On deviation to the side opposite the lesion, nystagmus 
may be less well defined, and tends to be a more rapid and less 
ample movement than when the eyes are directed towards the 
side of the lesion. Nystagmus is not necessarily the earliest 
focal symptom present. 

2. Atonia and Ataxy of the limbs on the side of the abscess. 
The arm musculature is flaccid, and on movement the pheno- 
mena of cerebellar involvement described on page 783 are seen. 

3. Paralyses of Cranial Nerves, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, 
seventh, and eighth may be present on the side of the lesion, 
but the localising value of these signs is less certain than those 
of cerebellar compression, since some of them may be present 
as a result of middle ear disease (seventh and eighth), and a 
sixth nerve palsy occurs with raised intracranial tension in 
lesions which do not directly involve the nerve. 

If diagnosis be not made at a time when atonia and shght 
inco-ordination of the limbs, with or without definite nystagmus, 
are alone present, the progressive drowsiness of the patient will 
probably prevent adequate examination. 

4. The Cerebrospinal Fluid. — In most cases there is a 
moderate increase in the ceUular and protein content of the 
fluid. Up to 30 cells per cubic millimetre may be foimd, the 
majority being lymphocytes, and not more than 5 per cent. 
IK)lymorphonuclear cells. When a subacute localised meningitis 
develops, the cell coimt rises considerably higher but often 
remains predominantly lymphocytic, but with an acute 
spreading meningitis polymorphonuclear cells predominate. 

The chlorides and the glucose remain normal unless a 
meningitis supervenes, when a drop in the percentage of both 
occurs. 

DiaiTQOsis. — Cerebral abscess may have to be differentiated 
from tumour, sinus thrombosis, and meningitis. In the case of 
pyaemic abscess the differentiation may be impossible apart 
from the history of the case and the presence of signs of chronic 
suppuration in the thorax. Thus the development of signs of 
intracranial hypertension after operation on a chronic empyema, 
or in a patient with bronchiectasis, is presumptive evidence in 
favour of abscess. The clinical signs of an acute infection of 
the meninges with the appropriate changes in the cerebrospinal 
fluid, and rapid downward course of the case usually serve 
to differentiate generalised meningitis from abscess. In lateral 
sinus thrombosis, signs of general septic infection are prominent ; 



832 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


repeated rigors, fever, embolic phenomena, and rapid wasting. 
Headache, restlessness, delirium, vomiting, and even papU- 
loedema may occur though no abscess be present. This 
combination of sjnnptoms, associated with a normal cerebro- 
spinal fluid, has been spoken of as “ otitic hydrocephalus ” 
and is treated by repeated lumbar puncture. 

The Treatment of cerebral abscess is exclusively surgical, 
and in the absence of effective drainage, death is inevitable. 


CHOREA 

Under this heading are included two types of disease wholly 
unrelated in nature and incidence, but alike in that they are 
characterised by the appearance of involuntary movements, 
irregular and spasmodic in character, occurring during rest, 
and also superimposed upon voluntary" movements which they 
render inco-ordinate. 

The one is known as rheumatic or Sydenham’s chorea, and 
is an extremely widespread malady of children dependent 
upon an infective inflammatory lesion of the brain ; the 
other is a rare chronic, progressive malady of middle-aged 
or elderly persons, which, when it is associated with mental 
deterioration, is known as Huntington’s chorea, otherwise 
as chronic progressive chorea. It depends upon degenerative 
changes in the brain, and has been described already (p. 82()). 

Rheumatic Chorea {Sydenham's Chorea) 

etiology. — It is a disease of young persons, nearly all cases 
occurring between the ages of five and twenty years. Girls 
are affected more frequently than boys in the proportion of 
three to one, and it is most common amongst children reared 
under junfavourable hygienic conditions. It is essentially a 
manifestation of rheumatic infection of the cerebral hemi- 
spheres, and the subjects of chorea commonly give a history 
of other evidences of rheumatic infection : thus a history of 
acute rheumatism, growing pains,*’ of sore throat, rheumatic 
nodules, or erythema is obtainable in almost all cases. In a 
first attack of chorea it is not the rule to find objective evidence 
of rheumatic endocarditis, but in second and subsequent 
attacks signs of cardiac involvement are much more common. 

Occasionally rheumatic nodules and fleeting joint pains of 
mild character may be noted during the course of an attack 
of chorea. 



CHOREA 833 

tredisposiiig factors in the subjects of the essential infection 
are a neuropathic inheritance, emotional instability, and debility. 

Pathology. — The essential lesion is a disseminated meningo- 
encephalitis affecting the cerebral cortex, corpus striatum, and 
pia-arachnoid. The organism responsible for the lesion is in all 
probability the same as that which causes rheumatic carditis 
and arthritis. On microscopic examination changes closely 
resembling those found in lethargic encephalitis are seen. 

Symptomatology. — The common mode of onset is subacute, 
and for one or more weeks before the appearance of the 
characteristic involuntary movements the child is noticed to 
be fretful, easily tired, and to be sleeping badly. Then a 
general motor restlessness is noticed, the cliild becomes fidgety, 
clumsy in movements, droj)8 things, and knocks against the 
furniture in moving through the room. Obvious involuntary 
movements then appear, the patient grimaces, twists jerkily, 
shrugging the shoulders and making sudden irregular move- 
ment of the head and limbs. These movements are increased 
in distribution and severity if the child be reprimanded, or 
has to carry out any purposive movement. Sometimes 
the articulation becomes disordered. Associated with these 
sj^mptoms is a generalised muscular weakness, emotional 
instability, and in severe cases definite mental excitement and 
derangement. 

The involuntary movements are true movements and not 
simple muscle twitches ; they are rapid and variable in form. 
If the patient be asked to grasp the examiner s hand it will be 
noticed that the muscular contraction is irregularly sustained 
and intermittent in character. Li addition, adventitious 
movements of the arm at elbow and shoulder occur and the 
limb is jerked irregularly to and fro as the grasp is kept 
up. Further, the involuntary movements in other }>arts of 
the musculature are increased, so that the patient grimaces, 
and the head and lower limbs go into unceasing movement. 
The tongue, when protruded, is jerked back rapidly into the 
mouth, and cannot be withdrawn voluntarily into the mouth 
except in jerks. The respiratory muscles partake in the 
general disturbance, and tiie rhythm and force of respiration 
are irregular. 

The movements may be predominantly unilateral, but are 
rarely absolutely so. For example, the facial musculature is 
always bilaterally affected. 

The muscular weakness varies from case to case, and in 
some instances is the predominating feature of the condition, 
involuntary movements being minimal. This is the so-called 

53 



834 Diseases of the nervous system 

chorea mollis. The child lies limply on its bed, the musculature 
is profoundly flaccid, and all movements are performed feebly 
and readily cause fatigue. The reflexes are not qualitatively 
altered, though in the flaccid cases the tendon jerks may be 
diminished, or even lost. In some cases a peculiar phenomenon 
is seen on eliciting the knee jerk with the leg slightly flexed. 
The leg rises from the bed and remains suspended in the air for a 
second or so before flopping back on to the bed, owing to the im- 
position of a choreic upon the reflex movement. The abdominal 
reflexes are retained and the plantar responses are of normal tjrpe. 

Although in first attacks of chorea definite evidence of 
rheumatic affection of the heart is frequently absent, yet 
slight dilatation and rapidity of the heart are common. In 
recurrent attacks endocarditis is often found. 

In a large number of subjects, second and third attacks 
occur at intervals of several months. 

Chorea may be met with in young women during their 
first pregnancy, the symptoms developing during the first three 
months and often becoming extremely severe. Added to a 
continual motor restlessness there may be active delirium and 
considerable weakness. Death may occur from exhaustion. 
It may recur in subsequent pregnancies. 

Course. — The duration of a case of average severity ranges 
from six weeks to several months. The longer course is seen 
in the absence of adequate measures of treatment and 
management. Sometimes temporary improvement or apparent 
recovery may be followed by recurrences, and thus the ^sease 
spreads out over a long period. Death from exhaustion occurs 
in a small number of cases, usually when the patient is 
adolescent or a pregnant woman. Rheumatic heart disease 
may also be responsible for a fatal issue. 

Diagnosis. — The two maladies with which Sydenham's 
chorea are most likely to be mistaken are multiple tics and the 
choreiform type of lethargic encephalitis. In the former case, 
the involuntary movements tend to be repetitive and peculiar 
to any given case, and cease in an affected limb when this is in 
voluntary use. There is no dysarthria, nor does the subject 
drop objects from the hands. The tic-like movements may 
persist for years or may suddenly change in form. In lethargic 
encephalitis the onset of choreiform movements is usually 
sudden, and there are associated ocular palsies : ptosis, squint, 
and diplopia. Slight fever, disturbances of sleep, and nocturnal 
delirium may also occur. 

Treatment — ^In cases of recent onset and of all grades of 
severity, rest in bed under conditions of reasonable quiet is 



DISSEMINATED SCLEROSIS 


835 


essential. The period of rest varies with the severity and with 
the rapidity of response to treatment. Separation from other 
children is advisable, but it is necessary to keep the patient 
contented and quietly amused. Since the subjects of chorea 
are frequently debilitated and badly nourished, their feeding 
must be carefully attended to. In profoimdly restless cases 
nasal feeding may be necessary, and in these circumstances 
particular efforts must be made to maintain nutrition as far 
as possible. When the movements are violent, the patient 
must be protected from injury by pUlows arranged round the 
bed and by cotton wool and bandages round the limbs. 

In the matter of drugs, aspirin is the most useful agent and is 
well tolerated by patients with chorea. For children from five to 
fifteen years of age 10 gr. three or four times daily may be given, 
and 15 gr. for older patients. If this does not suflBce to procure 
sleep, luminal or chloral and bromide may be given at night. 
In severe or resistant cases, the addition of chloretone (5gr. 
twice daily for a child of ten, and for a limited time) may be 
beneficial, but it should not be used as a substitute for aspirin. 

During convalescence general tonic treatment is indicated. 
Cod-liver oil and malt, syrup of hypophosphites, iron, and 
arsenic may all be usefully employed. 


DISSEMINATED SCLEROSIS 

Clinically, disseiiunated sclerosis is a malady of otherw^ise 
healthy young {ulults, usually characterised by an intermittent 
course which depends upon the acute development at irregular 
intervals and in various parts of the brain and spinal cord of 
multiple inflammatory foci. These lesions give rise to acute 
outbreaks of symptoms with intervals of improvement and 
quiescence. 

iEtiology. — Nothhig certain is known of the causative 
agent in this disease. The fresh lesions arc undoubtedly in- 
flammatory in nature, but w hether an organism or a circulating 
poison is responsible is unknown. It is essentially a malady of 
early adult hfe, its onset being rare before sixteen years of 
ago or after forty-five. Females are moio frequently affected 
than males, in the proportions of five to two. It is found with 
equal frequency in urban and rural dw^ellers and in persons of 
aU social grades and modes of life. In this country it is now 
the commonest organic nervous disease, exceeding neuro- 
syphilis, and is still increasing in frequency. Various factors 
have been invoked as either causative or precipitating, but 



836 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


with no convincing evidence. Thus, it may first become 
apparent after pregnancy and parturition, alter trauma or 
after infectious illnesses, but some at least of its principal 
symptoms are so insidious in onset that these alleged relation- 
sliips can never be established satisfactorily. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The primary lesion is one of medullated 
nerve sheaths within the brain and spinal cord, with associated 
secondary neuroglial and vascular reactions. The foci of the 
disease are scattered thickly throughout the nervous system, 
being usually most abundant immediately beneath the cerebral 
cortex and beneath the ependymal lining of the ventricles, and 
si)read at random throughout all parts of the brain stem and 
cord. The cerebellum is less thickly sown wth patches of 
disease than the rest of the nervous system. The lesions vary 
in size from microscopic foci to patches of one or more 
centimetres in diameter. They are sharply delimited from 
normal tissue and are wholly irregular in outline, invading 
grey and white matter indifferently. 

I'he optic nerve is ver\^ commonly the seat of one or more 
lesions. The myelin sheaths are early destroyed and the axis 
cylinders stripp^. The former degenerate into fatty droplets 
and the latter may be distorted. Neuroglial reaction is present, 
and varies in apjxjarance and intensity accx^rding to the age of 
the lesion. Nerve cell bodies included within a patch undergo 
some chroraatolysis, but are much less severely affected than 
the nerve fibres. To the naked eye a fresh patch has a pinkish, 
swollen, translucent appearance, but old jmtches are grey and 
sclerosed. 

Symptomatology. — The clinical course of the disease may 
usefully be divided into three stages : the stage of evolution, 
the stage of full development, and the final stage. 

The stage of evolution may be long drawn out, and it is 
frequently ten years before the malady is fuUy developed. 
The initial sjunptoms are of two orders : those referable to 
lesions of the spinal cord and those due to lesions in the brain 
stem and optic nerves. The spinal cord symptoms are usually 
very slow and insidious in onset, and have been present in most 
cases for one or more years before the subject seeks mediwil 
advice. ITiey consist in a slowly developing weakness of one 
or both legs, which is first mwifested as undue fatigue on 
walking and then by actual dragging of the foot or feet when 
the subject is tired. This slow progress may be interrupted by 
a sudden marked exacerbation of weakness in one leg, which 
makes unassisted walking impossible for a week or more, and 
then slowly clears up, leaving a variable degree of residual 



DISSEMINATED SCLEROSIS 


837 


weakness behind. It is not uncommon for the initial symptoms 
to be regarded by the patient as due to some local disorder of 
the leg or foot, such as ‘‘ rheumatism,” “ sprain,” or “ displaced 
cartilage of the knee ” until after a year or more the increasing 
severity of the disability leads the doctor to question the 
patient’s diagnosis and for the first time to make an adequate 
clinical examination. 

The upper limbs are peculiarly prone to sudden temporary 
accesses of what the patient describes as ‘"uselessness,” which 
are found on examination to consist of severe ataxy due to impair- 
ment of the sense of position and rarely to true motor weakness. 

Punctuating this course of events, or even preceding it by 
one or more years, there occur striking sjTnptoms of acute 
onset referable to the optic or oculomotor functions. Transient 
blindness or severe impairment of vision in one eye, of rapid 
onset, of one or two weeks’ duration, and followed by complete 
or almost complete restoration of vision, or transient diplopia 
without unequivocal squint are the characteristic expression of 
these lesions. This impairment of visual acuity is the result 
of retrobulbar neuritis (see p. 892). At the time when the 
disturbance is first noted oj)hthalmoBCopic examination is 
negative, though rarely a slight cedema of the optic disc may 
be noted. The temporal pallor which ensues is not present 
for some weeks later. These may recur at intervals, affecting 
first one eye and then its fellow. At this stage of the disease, 
nystagmus, scanning speech, and intention tremor are quite 
exceptional, except in those few cases in which the cerebellar 
projection fibres in the brain stem are involved early and 
severely. These three symptoms, the so-called triad of Charcot, 
are commonly symptoms of the fully developed disease, and are 
not constant even then. They are not essential to a diagnosis 
of the disease, and if they are so regarded its recognition must 
always be unwarrantably delayed. Fleeting pains of moderate 
degree in back and limbs and parsesthesiae in the extremities 
are common. Some cases develop rather rapidly with the 
simultaneous appearance of weakness and pareesthesiae in one 
or more limbs, while a fulminating onset with intense vertigo, 
sickness, and inco-ordination may also be met with. 

During the ten or even more years that this slow and 
variable progress of the disease goes on the patient may have 
intervals of several years of apparently quite perfect recovery, 
in which even objective physical signs may be difficult to find. 
The fugitive character of signs and symptoms has given rise 
to the view that hysterical phenomena are common concomi- 
tants of early disseminated sclerosis, and many early cases of 



838 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


the malady are I'egarded as hysteria when a careful history is 
not taken and no opportunity occurs of examining the patient 
during the transient presence of the disabilities complained of. 
The slight emotional facility which many patients show is an 
added basis for this belief. In exceptional cases no remissions 
occur. 

Examination during the stage of evolution reveals in most 
oases an absolutely typical group of physical signs. The 
tendon reflexes are exaggerated, and there may be unilateral 
or bilateral ankle clonus, the plantar responses are of the 
extensor or Babinski type on both sides, the abdominal reflexes 
are commonly absent, and the legs may show a minimal degree 
of spastic paresis. Although the disabihty of the limbs 
complained of may be one-sided, examination commonly 
reveals bilateral physical signs. In addition, there may be 
pathological pallor of the temporal halves of one or both optic 
discs and a loss of vibration sensation in the legs. This group 
of signs, in the absence of cutaneous sensory loss, is an adequate 
basis for the diagnosis of the disease. Other signs may some- 
times be added to these, including nystagmus, slight intention 
tremor of the hands, and some ataxy of gait (due to impairment 
of the sense of position in the legs). 

In the stage of fvU development there is definite spastic 
paresis of the legs, and the patient may be bedridden or require 
assistanc*e in walking. Flexor spasms in the legs have begun 
to occur, and precipitancy and even incontinence of urine. 
The arms may be ataxic or show that fonn of unsteadiness on 
purposive movement knovm as intention tremor. Nystagmus 
and a peculiar spacing of syllables in articulation may be 
present. By this time there is a severe degree of j)ermanent 
unvarying disability, and remissions of any great degree have 
ceased to occur. Finally, after a varying period of years, 
flexion contracture develops in the legs, with profound loss of 
voluntary power, the sphincters act involuntarily, the arms are 
unsteady, the articulation grossly disordered, and tremor of the 
head and trunk may accompany all attempts at movement. 
In addition, the patient is very euphoric and fatuous, having 
little insight into the severity and hoj)eless nature of his condi- 
tion. Occasionally gross symptoms of mental disorder of 
variable character may be present. Death ensues from some 
intercurrent infection, pulmonary or urinary, or by septic 
absorption from bed-sores. 

In some cases the progress of the disease is indefinitely 
arrested in the earlier stages, and the patient continues to 
lead a restricted life for many years. 



DISSEMINATED SCLEROSIS 839 

Characteristic of the malady in most instances is the absence 
or late appearance of cutaneous sensory loss. Loss of the sense 
of position in the limbs and of vibration sensation is common. 

The blindness which may occur as an incident in the disease 
is never permanent, though an attack of retrobulbar neuritis 
from development of a patch of disease in the optic nerve may 
leave some degree of visual impairment and a marked degree 
of pallor of the discs. Permanent paresis of cranial nerves is 
also exceptional. 

Cerebrospinal Fluid , — In about 60 per cent, of cases, there 
is a slight mononuclear lymphocytosis, little or no protein 
increase, a negative Wassermann reaction and a “ paretic 
type of Lange colloidal gold curve. For further details on the 
last-named reaction the reader is referred to page 861. 

Diagnosis. — Although it may be difficult, an accurate 
diagnosis can usually be made even in the earliest stages of 
the malady. The typical combination of history and signs are 
not found in any other malady. The gravest difficulties arise 
in those cases where transient blindness precedes all other signs 
and symptoms. The patient is usually a young woman in whom, 
during the course of a few days, vision has rapidly failed in 
one eye, being reduced to appreciation of hand movements. 
Examination of the fundus oculi reveals nothing whatever 
abnormal until several weeks have elapsed and after visual 
acuity has been restored. Despite the extreme rarity of 
retrobulbar neuritis from sphenoidal sinus infection and its 
extreme frequency in disseminated sclerosis, a diagnosis of 
sinus infection is usually made in cases of the kind, and the 
inevitable restoration of vision is attributed to whatever 
operative procedures may have been adopted to drain the 
sinus. The i)atient at the time may present no objective 
signs of any nervous system disease, a fact which probably 
accounts for the continued non-recognition of this symptom as 
a common mitial manifestation of disseminated sclerosis, some- 
times preceding all other symptoms by periods ranging from a 
few weeks to fifteen years, or occasionally longer. 

Another fruitful source of error is provided by cases in which 
the signs and symptoms suggest a focal lesion of the spinal 
cord, with cutaneous sensory loss up to a segmental level. In 
these cases the presence of exaggerated tendon reflexes in the 
arms, of pallor of the discs, of slight nystagmus, and of an 
indistinctness or variability in the upper level of sensory loss 
should always give rise to suspicion as to the true nature of 
the condition present. Further, examination of the cerebro- 
spinal fluid may serve to differentiate compression of the cord 



840 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

from disseminated sclerosis, in which disease the fluid may 
be normal in the early stages or present no other abnormality 
than a slight lymphocytosis and slight increase of protein, and 
is alwa^^s colourless and clear. 

In other cases again, ataxic symptoms and disturbances 
of ocular movement may precede definite indications of 
pyramidal tract involvement, and a diagnosis of focal pontine 
or brain stem lesion may be made. In the great majority of 
cases, however, the combination of signs given above as 
characteristic of the stage of evolution is present and makes 
a correct diagnosis possible. 

Prognosis. — Although disseminated sclerosis is a progressive 
malady ending in most cases in profoimd disability, yet nothing 
can be more difficult than to give a prognosis in an early case. 
This is especially so when vre remember that retrobulbar neuritis 
is commonly an initial symptom, occurring sometimes years 
before any other manifestation of the disease develops. In 
other words, a young person with a unilateral retrobular 
neuritis may have an unknown period of normal health be- 
fore her, ranging from weeks to years. In such circmnstances 
the greatest caution in giving a prognosis to the patient or her 
relatives should be observed, and rash generalisations as to 
the ad\isability of marriage, for exami>Ie, should, out of 
ordinary humanity, be avoided and not offered uninvited. 

Once symptoms referable to a spinal cord affection have 
made their appearance a graver prognosis as to the possible 
duration of wage-earning capacity is justifiable, though even 
here long remi.ssions are not rare and the future depends in 
some degree on the nature of the patient’s work : hard physical 
work being more likely to have adverse results than purely 
sedentary work. Very many subjects of disseminated sclerosis 
do in fact remain at work for years after the nature of their 
illness is declared. Perhaps there is no malady in which the 
future of the individual patient is more difficult to forecast, and 
no situation in which an economy of speculation is more 
expedient. 

Treatment. — There is, unfortunately, no method of treat- 
ment which is certainly known to influence the course of the 
malad3% and this course is so capricious and the occurrence of 
long remissions so common that the assessment of any mode 
of treatment is extremely difficult. In the circumstances it is 
not surprising that extravagant claims are made from time to 
time in favour of this or that mode of treatment by those not 
familiar with the natural history of the disease. 

Amongst recent methods for which favourable results have 



ACUTE DISSEMINATED ENCEPHALOMYELITIS 841 


been claimed are protein shock therapy, pyrotherapy, electro- 
therapy and liver treatment. In respect of none of these is 
there available any sound evidence of their efl&cacy. 

It has long b^n known that fever occurring during the 
course of disseminated sclerosis affects it adversely, and it is not 
clear that artificially produced fever is free from the same danger. 

It cannot be said that the traditional practice of giving 
arsenic (either by mouth or by the injection of organic com- 
pounds) has ever justified its use, and the same may be said of 
the other anti-syphilitic drugs which have been employed. 

Recently, the use of quinine (quinine bihydrochloride 
5 gr. twice daily) has been advocated. Here again the proof 
of its value is yet to be established, but the drug produces 
no harmful reactions and it is worthy of trial. 

Perhaps more important than any formal method of treat- 
ment is the right ordering of the j)atient's life when this is 
practicable. All forms of fatigue must be carefully avoided, 
and their inadvertent occurrence must be dealt with by corre- 
sponding rest. Infectious illnesses, trauma, and other forms 
of stress all have a deleterious influence on the course of the 
malady. Although it is not usual for the symptoms to increase 
should pregnancy supervene in the patient, yet delivery is 
often followed by an exacerbation of the malady, which may 
even first come to notice in these circumstances. The presence 
of disseminated sclerosis is not in itself an indication for any 
intervention in the course of a normal pregnancy, but only for 
greater care of the patient during this period. Indeed, the 
artificial termination of pregnancy is sometimes as disastrous 
as a full-term confinement. Should an outbreak of symptoms 
occur, the patient is best kept in bed for two or three weeks, 
with massage to maintain the muscular condition. While any 
obvious focus of gross infection may usefully be dealt with as 
an adjuvant to treatment, it is unwise to expect such measures 
to have any material influence on the course of the disease, 
and indeed meddlesome therapy of this order may even be 
harmful in the reactions it provokes. 

ACUTE DISSEMINATED ENCEPHALOMYELITIS 
AND NEUROMYELITIS OPTICA 

The relation of these two maladies to each other and of 
each of them to disseminated sclerosis is not yet certain. All 
three are essentially demyelinating diseases, but those two now 
under consideration are more acute and severe in the lesions 
associated with them. 



842 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


In the brain the lesions are mainly confined to white matter. 
They are small and multiple. Not oiMy may the myelin sheaths 
be destroyed, but the axis cylinders also, while there may also 
be glia cell degeneration and tiny areas of softening and even 
of cavitation. In neuromyelitis optica or Devic’s disease, as 
it is also called, the optic nerve is similarly affected. These 
maladies occur at aU age periods. 

Neurornyditis Optica , — The s^unptoms are those of a trans- 
verse myelitis of rapid onset and of a retrobulbar neuritis 
(central scotoma, and even complete blindness, oedema of the 
optic discs). The mjelitis may precede or may follow the 
retrobulbar neuritis, and an interval of months may separate 
them. The paraplegia is often total, and may ascend for a 
time, so that respiratory failure and death may ensue. On the 
other hand, recovery may occur. Vision may be almost com- 
pletely restored, but some defect commonly remains, and after 
the lapse of some months the characteristic pallor of primary 
atrophy appears. 

The cerebrospinal fluid may show an increase of lymi)hocytes 
(up to 50 to the C.C.). 

Treatment has no influence upon the disease process, and 
the care of the patient is that of any case of paraplegia. 

Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis , — The symptoms may 
be those of an acute and severe disseminated sclerosis. There 
are headache, sickness, and vertigo, sometimes 8tui)or or 
delirium. There may be weakness and unsteadiness of the 
limbs, ivith the reflex changes characteristic of pyramidal 
lesions. Recoverj^ or death may ensue. 

As for neuromyelitis optica, there is no 8j)ecific treatment. 


THE VIRUS DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
{Poliomyelitis, Encephalitis, Herpes Zoster, Rabies) 

Under the heading of virus diseases we must include polio- 
myelitis, epidemic encephalitis, the encephalitis and myelitis 
that may follow vaccinia and the acute specific fevers, rabies, 
and also herpes zoster. 

Owing to their aflSnity for the nervous system the viruses 
in question are known as neurotropic, and since they act 
primarily upon the nerve cell they are also spoken of as polio- 
clastic. They multiply and exert their pathogenic activity 
only in contact with the living cell, within which their life and 
activity are short-lived. After a short period they disappear, 
and thus virus cUseases are said to be self-limiting. 



POLIOMYELITIS 


843 


Clinically they produce an encephalitis or a myelitis accord- 
ing to the part of the nervous system upon which they act, or 
more precisely the part in which their action predominates, 
since both brain and cord involvement are present in them all. 
The vascular and glial reactions which may be associated with 
the nerve cell lesion are secondary, and are not, as used to be 
thought — at least in the case of poliomyelitis — a preliminary 
to nerve cell involvement. 

In aU cases, the virus is to be found only in the nervous 
tissues and not in blood or cerebrospinal fluid : that is to say, 
the virus infections are primary infections of the nervous 
system and not generalised, systemic infections. 

In rabies, infection follows a bite by a rabid animal, the 
virus entering a local nerve ending (see p. 209). 


POLIOMYELITIS {Infantile Paralysis) 

It was formerly held that there were three distinct stages 
in the evolution of this disease : a stage of general infection, a 
stage of invasion of the subarachnoid space (with infection of 
the cerebrospinal fluid), and a final stage of invasion of the 
nervous system. It was thought that the virus gained access 
to the cerebrospinal fluid by travelling up the perineural 
lymphatics of the olfactory nerves, and that it spread within 
the subarachnoid space and thence infected the spinal cord. 

It is now believed, as the result of recent investigations, 
that from the outset poliomyelitis is an infection exclusively 
of the nervous system, and aU the symptoms of the disease 
are due to the action of the virus upon nerve cells. It would 
thus appear that the virus is already established within the 
nervous system when the first symptom develops. 

The disease occurs sporadically and in epidemic form, and 
appears usually in the late summer and autumn. Both rural 
and urban communities are liable to epidemic invasion. Withm 
the past twenty -five years, severe epidemics have occurred in the 
United States, in the Scandinavian countries, and in Australia. 
Fortunately there has been no serious outbreak in Great Britain. 

iStiology. — The responsible organism is one of the smallest 
filterable viruses known. Man and the chimpanzee are the 
only natural hosts, though other monkeys can be successfully 
inoculated. Under experimental conditions the disease can 
be conveyed by inoculation through the cerebral, intranasal, 
tonsillo-pharyngeal, vitreous and intestinal routes, the tonsUlo- 
pharyngeal being the most uniformly successful. This fact is 



844 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


significant when we recall that cases of the bulbar type of 
poliomyelitis may occur, during epidemics of the disease, in 
children subjected to tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy. 

The view formerly held that the habitual portal of entry 
of the virus into the nervous system in man was the olfactory 
one, namely, from the nasal cavity via the filaments of the 
olfactory nerves into the brain, has lost ground since recent 
histological investigations have failed to find the characteristic 
tissue reaction to the entry of the virus in the olfactory bulbs 
or tracts. Further, the presence of virus in the stools in human 
cases and in the gut wall in the experimental disease has led 
to the suggestion that the alimentary tract may provide the 
common port of entry : the pharynx in bulbar and the bowel 
in spinal cases. It is suggested that the virus passes thence by 
sympathetic nerves into the spinal cord. 

Further, since the virus can, by means of monkey inocula- 
tion experiments, be detected in the stools not only during the 
acute illness but also for some weeks afterwards, the belief 
that chronic carriers do not occur in the case of poliomyelitis 
appears to be invalid. Unfortunately, no ready means of 
detecting carriers exists, for there are no specific precipitin, 
complement-fixation or cutaneous tests for poliomyelitis. 

There is no conclusive evidence that the virus can infect 
or multiply in extraneural tissues, and therefore the present 
view that poliomyelitis is an exclusively nervous system in- 
fection still holds. 

The incubation period is believed to be from five to twelve days. 

Epidemiology. — ^The view that poliomyelitis is an exclusively 
human-lx)rnc disease is at present undergoing modification, 
for the virus has been found in active form in the lx)dies of 
flies frequenting localities w here the disease is present and theiic 
insects may therefore act as vectors. In its epidemic form 
poliomyelitis is usually a malady of the autumn, and epidemics 
tend to die down rapidly when the weather turns cold and 
frosts appear : that is, when house flies disappear. It has also 
been suggested that milk may be a vehicle of infection. Other 
modes of spread may depend upon the fact that the virus is 
active in the faeces of sufferers and of convalescents, and has 
been isolated from sewage coming from a focus of infection. 

Two types of individual carry and spread the infection, the 
healthy carrier of the virus and patienta suffering from the 
disease in its so-called abortive forms and in tlie pre-poralytic 
stages. It is clear, also, that even paralysed patients during the 
first two weeks of the illness are infectious, though once paral}^8ed 
their opportunities of spreading the malady are restricted. 



POLIOMYELITIS 


845 


It is probable that the infectivity of the disease varies from 
epidemic to epidemic, and there seems to be a high degree of 
natural resistance m the community. This may in part be an 
acquired immunity on the part of individuals who in infancy 
have suffered from an unrecognised abortive attack of the 
disease. A single attack gives permanent immunity to the 
individual. Protective antibodies have been found in adult 
human serum in 70 per cent, of all sera tested, though whether 
this depends upon a prior, non-paralytic attack of the disease 
or not, is not certain. 

Pathology. — The primary and essential lesion of the disease 
is in the nerve cell, and the virus appears to have a special 
affinity for the large cells of the ventral horns of the spinal cord, 
especially in the lumbar region. The lesions vary from 
chromatolysis to completo necrosis. Immediately following 
this, an inflammatory reaction with exudate appears in the 
interstitial tissue of the neighbouring grey matter, in the 
perivascular spaces and in the meninges. This reaction in 
turn leads to alterations in the cerebrospinal fluid. It was 
formerly thought that tliis reaction and the resulting change 
in the fluid were aU precursors of the ceU lesion, but it is now 
known that they are consequences of the latter. Although 
the nerve e'en lesions which lead to paralysis are those in the 
brain stem and spinal cord, an encephahtis is an essential 
element in every case of the disease, even in those in which 
paralysis does not ensue. The virus and the reaction it 
produces are invariably present in the motor cortex, thalamus, 
vestibular and cerebellar nuclei. 

Symptoms. — The clinical course may be divided into three 
phases, it being borne in mind that each of them results from 
the action of the virus upon nerve cells. The first phase is 
characterised by fever (103° to 104° F.) and by a peculiar and 
characteristic condition of the child, who is flushed, apt to be 
irritable and apprehensive. Those who are familiar with 
epidemic outbreaks of pohomyehtis state that this aspect of the 
picture marks out the disease from the other infectious fevers of 
childhood. In severe cases the child may be restless, his move- 
ments are jerky, and irregular tremors are seen from time to time. 

The second phase succeeds in a few hours, and to the previous 
symptoms are now added localised pains in back and limbs, 
muscular tenderness, stiffness of the neck and back, unsteadiness 
of movement and weakness. 

The third phase, that of paralysis, then develops suddenly, 
generally within one to three days from the original onset of 
symptoms. 



846 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

It has long been known that in epidemics of the disease a 
proportion of patients make a recovery before the appearance 
of the third stage. These non-paralysed cases are spoken of 
as “ abortive cases.” In these the virus has been neutralised 
by the natural resisting agencies in the body before it has been 
able to damage the ventral horn cells sufficiently to produce 
paralysis. It is not correct to regard them as cases which the 
virus has not succeeded in gaining access to the nervous system. 
It is believed that as many as 70 per cent, of all infected 
cliildren during an epidemic may escape paralysis in this way. 

It has in the past been customary to speak of cerebral, 
cerebellar, brain stem, spinal and neuritic t 3 ^pe 8 of poliomyelitis, 
but it is highly probable that all but the brain stem and spinal 
forms of paralysis are not due to infection by the virus of 
poliomyelitis, but constitute a mixed group of infections of 
varied and unknown origin. We shall therefore onl}' consider 
pontobulbar and spinal paralyses. 

The paralysis may var}^ from weakness of a single muscle to 
widespread paralysis of limb and trunk musculature. When 
the paralysis is limited in extent, the deltoid and the dorsi- 
flexors of the foot and toes are especially prone to be picked 
out, but there may be extensive paralysis of one or more limbs, 
with or without involvement of abdominal, back, neck, and 
thoracic muscles. As a rule the paral 3 ^ 8 i 8 is maximal in degree 
and extent at the moment of onset, but an ascending paralysis, 
or the spread at short inten^als of paralj^sLs from limb to limb, 
may occur. Ascending paralysis terminating in involvement 
of the respiratory muscles and death within a period of hours 
is more common in cases occurring during epidemics, especially 
in adult patients. Of the total number of muscles involved, 
some are totally paralysed and a greater number w'eakened. 
In a few cases there is a widespread slight paresis of muscles, 
which is apt to be regarded as a general debihty following the 
febrile constitutional disturbance which precedes it. Similarly, 
cases in which paralysis or paresis is restricted to the back or 
abdominal musculature may escape diagnosis. For a period 
var 3 ring from one to several weeks some or all of the affected 
muscles may be painful and extremely tender on manipulation. 
When these symptoms pass off the patient ib said to have 
entered the convalescent stage of the disease. 

Wherever there is an appreciable weakness of a muscle the 
corresponding tendon jerk is greatly diminished or al)oli8hed. 
Sensory loss does not occur, and the only sphincter disturbance 
is a temporary retention of urine which rarely lasts for more 
than two or three days. 



POLIOMYELITIS 847 

When the period of convalescence is entered, the affected 
muscles may be divided into those which recover rapidly and 
completely, those which make a gradual and partial recovery, 
and those which remain permanently paralysed. The last two 
groups undergo progressive wasting, and in severe cases extreme 
and widespread muscular atrophy may ensue, with defective 
growth of the affected limbs subsequently. Under adequate 
treatment some degree of progressive improvement may go on 
for two or even three years. After this period, no further 
improvement can be expected. 

In the process of wasting, fibrous tissue forms in the muscles, 
and unless appropriate measures are taken from the outset 
may result in considerable deformity of the affected region. 

The Cerebrospinal Fluid . — ^The examination of this fluid is 
of great importance if a diagnosis is to be made during the 
preparalytic stage of the disease. The fluid may be normal 
during the opening hours of the first phase, but as the second 
phase is reached the cellular content rapidly increases. At 
first polymorphonuclear cells predominate (from 30 to 2000 per 
C.C.), and when the count is high the fluid may be opalescent. 
V"ery soon the proportion of h^mphocytes increases, and towards 
the end of the febrile period they outnumber the polynuclear 
cells. The globulin content of the fluid is raised, but the 
chlorides and glucose remain imchanged. After the appearance 
of paralysis the fluid soon resumes its normal composition. 

These changes in the fluid were formerly thought to express 
the invasion of the subarachnoid space by the virus, and to 
precede the invasion of the nervous tissues. It is now known, 
however, that they follow and are a consequence of the patho- 
genic activity of the virus vithin the nerve cells. 

Treatment. — This includes (i) measures intended to cut short 
infection before the nerve cells have been irreparably damaged, 
(ii) measures to prevent the spread of infection to susceptible 
persons, and (iii) measures for dealing with parah^sis when 
this ensues. 

It has long been knovTi that the serum of persons who 
have survived an attack of poliomyelitis, so-called “ convalescent 
serum,” has the power of protecting that susceptible animal, 
the monkey, from infection under certain conditions. These 
conditions are that serum and infective material are inoculated 
together into the animal, or that the serum is given not later 
than twenty -four hours after inoculation with infective material. 
On the other hand, if any symptoms of poliomyehtis have 
appeared in an infected animal, it is then useless to give serum, 
since it neither outs short nor mitigates the severity of the disease. 



848 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Although this observation should have warned us to expect 
little from the serum treatment of poliomyelitis in man, since 
serum can never be administered until symptoms appear, yet 
for over twenty years this treatment has been in use and many 
striking claims have been made for its efficacy. It is said, 
when given in the preparalytic stage, to have prevented the 
appearance of paralysis in some cases, and to have reduced 
the extent and severity of paralysis in others. 

W ithin the past few years the attempt has been made to 
see whether these claims can be accepted, and it is now 
generally agreed that there is no clear evidence that at 
any stage of the disease the use of serum has any influence 
upon its subsequent course. In some extensive epidemics 
in the United States half the patients seen in the pre- 
paralytic stage of the disease were given serum, and in half 
the cases it was withheld. Those not given scrum fared as 
well as those who received it. 

The nasal instillation of a 2 per cent, solution of potassium 
chlorate lias been advised as a prophylactic in susceptible 
contacts, and the oral administration of the same drug as a 
means of combating the infection in its preparalytic stage. 
For tlie latter purpose as much as 5 gr. for an infant and 50 
to 70 gr. for adults — this dose being spread over a twenty-four 
hour period — have been recommended. This dosage is continued 
for a maximum of four or five days, and for loss if the 
temperature falls to normal earlier. Full confirmation of the 
value of these proc^ures must wait upon further experience, 
but in the view of the crippling effects of poliomyelitis a trial 
of them is worth consideration. 

In short, there is so far no known method of cutting short 
the infection. 8 ^ 0*6 we are dealing with a nasopharyngeal 
infection in which the secretions are infective for some days 
before and after the appearance of paralysis, cases coming 
under observation during tliis time should be dealt with 
accordingly, and treated as any other infectious disease. In 
the American epidemics strict isolation is practised, but in this 
country, owing to the fact that clear clinical evidence of case 
to case infection is scanty, a less rigorous isolation is adopted. 
Whether antiseptic douching of the nasoiffiar^mx is of value is 
doubtful, but its use may serve to impress the infective nature 
of the malady ujsm the patient ’.s attendants. Potassium 
penaunganate solution may be used. From what has been 
said of the common presence of the virus in the stools, and 
from the po.ssibility that it may {xjrsist for some wrecks, tlm 
stools should be dealt with as in the case of typhoid. Tlie 



Poliomyelitis 

bed-pan, when one is used, and the bed-linen should be treated 
on the same lines . 

The only indication for drugs is muscular pain, and for this 
purpose acetyl-salicylic acid is generally adequate. 

The most arduous part of treatment is that of the paralysed 
muscles. To be effective it must be continued in severely 
paralysed cases for a very long period, and some general 
principles only can be formulated here. The three essentials 
are muscular rest, the maintenance of good posture, and 
re-education exercises. While pain persists, rest and the 
maintenance of physiological posture are the only justifiable 
measures, and massage and electrical stimulation are absolutely 
contraindicated. From the moment that paralysis develops, 
the affected muscles must be kept at rest in a ix>sition of 
relaxation. The legs must be extended, adducted, and rotated 
in so that the feet he side by side. For this purpose the use 
of pillows, sandbags, and of simple splinting with cardboard 
and bandages generally suffice. Plaster bandages are rarely 
necessary, and if applied should be regarded as a temporary 
measure. Similarly, the hand should be kept in the mid- 
position, and the shoulder abducted when the deltoid is affected. 
If the erector spinse (sacrospinalis) be involved, the patient must 
be kejjt in the supine position for several weeks and not allowed 
to sit up iintil a mechanical support has been prepared. Ex- 
tensively paralysed patients may for a time be nursed upon 
a plaster bed with the legs slightly abducted. 

These measures to secure relaxation and to prevent stretching 
of the paralysed muscles must be maintained indefinitely, but 
prolonged immobilisation is imdesirable. As soon as possible, 
when suitable mechanical support has been provided, the 
patient should be got on his feet whenever possible, and except 
in the most extensively and profoundly paralysed cases this 
can generally be done. Re-education exercises now become 
of value. These consist in assisted active movements of the 
weakened muscles, in which the movement is attempted with 
the muscle almost in the position of greatest shortening ; that 
is to say, a full excursion of the limb is not attempted. By 
varying the patient’s position and by giving active help the 
weight of the limb is taken off the muscle, and the action of 
gravity overcome. Such movement should be undertaken 
daily for short periods, fatigue being carefully avoided. With 
returning power less active assistance is required. Walking 
exercise with a walking chair must be employed when 
possible. 

Massage takes a secondary place in treatment, and is most 

54 



850 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

useful for those muscles which, being totally paralysed, cannot 
be dealt with in any other way. It must never be regarded 
as an adequate substitute for active exercises. Despite a 
widespread belief to the contrary, there is no unequivocal 
evidence that any form of electrical stimulation is of the 
slightest use in assisting in the recovery of power in paralysed 
or weakened muscles, and its employment is harmful if it 
replaces rational and useful modes of treatment. Moreover, 
the use of powerful currents, by inducing contraction in normal 
muscles, tends to aggravate the tendency to deformity and to 
stretching of w^eakened muscles. 

When, during the acute stage, paralysis invades the respira- 
tory muscles death may ensue from asphj^xia. To tide the 
patient over this peril the use of respirators has been adopted. 
These are of two t}^pes, the box respirator of Drinker type in 
which the patient is enclosed, his head protruding at one end 
of the box through a rubber collar roimd the neck. A motor 
produces rhjd;hmic positive and negative pressures within the 
respirator and the chest is passively moved. In the Bragg- 
Paul tjT)e a rubber bag encircles the patient’s thorax and is 
rhj^hmically filled and deflated by means of a motor, and the 
chest thus rhj^thmioally compressed and released. Experience 
has not altogether confirmed the over-enthusiastic claims made 
for these devices. For cases in which the main lesiojis are 
bulbar, and respiratory difiiculty arises from involvement of 
the respiratory centre, their use is strongly contraindicated, 
and the careful clearing of the air passages from accumulating 
secretions is essential. In respiratory mascle paralysis, the 
apparatus is of value in those exceptional cases in which this 
paralysis is transient. Too often these muscles do not recover, 
and permanent confinement in the respirator is then inevitable, 
or the measure of recovery obtained is minimal and leaves a 
permanently helpless and bedridden patient. In short, the 
maximal usefulness of the respirator is not for cases of polio- 
myelitis, but for such conditions as coal-gas i>oisoning where 
reciovery may be anticipated if death is averted. 

The outbreak of an epidemic of poliomyelitis in a school 
presents problems of some diflSculty. Clearly, the closing of a 
day school is imperative, but it has been urged that this step 
in the case of a boarding school necessitates the dissemination 
of a number of possible carriers and incubating cases, and may 
thus lead to fmther spread of the disease. 

On the other hand, the occurrence of case to case infection 
is established beyond reasonable doubt, and within the school 
community fresh cases may continue to break out for several 



LETHARGIC ENCEPHALITIS 


851 


weeks. In other words, every healthy child retained within 
such an infected community remains exposed to infection with 
its frequently disastrous consequences. There can be no 
justification for exposing a number of children to this danger. 
The safest plan, therefore, is probably the disbandment of the 
school and the segregation of exposed children within their 
own homes for a period of two weeks, care being taken 
not to allow them to come in contact with other children 
in the household. 


LETHARGIC ENCEPHALITIS (Epidemic Encephalitis) 

This malady occurs sporadically and in epidemics, but 
evidence of the infectivity of cases is uncertain and its mode 
of spread is unknown. Multiple cases in a household are 
extremely rare. No age is exempt from susceptibility to the 
disease. During the few years which have elapsed since its 
recognition the clinical picture of the malady has varied 
considerably in different outbreaks and has not always con- 
formed to that by which it was orginally identified. 

iEtiology. — The disease is believed to be due to infection 
by a specific virus, which so far has been neither observed nor 
cultivated in vitro. It is not 3 ^et certainly established that 
the disease can be transmitted to animals by the inoculation 
of brain substance from fatal human cases. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Multiple small meningeal haemorrhages 
are sometimes seen over the cerebral hemispheres. Micro- 
8Copicallj% a widespread inflammatory reaction and extensive 
neuronal degeneration are found. In rapidly fatal cases the 
former may be slight, but in cases of longer standing it dominates 
the histological picture. Although diffuse, these changes tend 
to be most profound in the region of the basal ganglia and 
brain stem, and the melanin -containing nerve cells of these 
regions seem to suffer most severely. 

The inflammatory leaction consists in congestion of blood 
vessels of all sizes, of minute haemorrhages scattered throughout 
the brain substance, and of the characteristic perivascular 
infiltration by lymphocjdes and — in smaller numbers — hy 
plasma cells. Numerous lipoid granules, the products of nerve 
cell degeneration, are also seen in the perivascular spaces. 

The cerebrospinal fluid maj^ be normal, but when altered 
shows a lymphocytosis with normal protein and glucose con- 
tents. Up to one hundred cells per cubic milfimetre may 
be present. 



862 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Symptoms. — The great number of symptoms and the various 
combinations and sequences in which they may occur make a 
clinical description of the malady somewhat difficult. We may 
divide them into constitutional and nervous symptoms, still 
further subdividing the latter according to their nature and 
localising significance. 

The constitutional symptoms vary greatly in severity and 
duration. They may be so trivial as to escape notice, or so 
profound as to induce a typhoid state, ending in death after 
some weeks. In its commoner and mild form this phase of 
the malady consists in a febrile illness of some few days’ 
duration, the symptoms being headache, malaise, minor 
gastro-intestinal symptoms (of which constipation is one of 
the most common), pains in back and Umbs, and occasionally 
an erythematous rash. A diagnosis of influenza is often made 
when such a patient seeks medical advice. 

Certain characteristic symptoms, however, should lead to 
the recognition of the real nature of the illness. These are 
drowsiness by day, giving place at night to a muttering 
occupational delirium, and signs of cranial nerve involvement 
such as squint, diplopia, ptosis, and nystagmus, all of which 
may be verj^ transient. 

The nervous symptoms may be referable to involvement of 
any part of the nervous system including nerve roots, and 
they may for practical purposes be divided into irritative and 
parahiiic sjouptoms. The former include wild choreiform 
movements with active delirium, Jacksonian convulsions, 
rhythmic twitching of strands of muscle fibres occurring at 
random throughout the skeletal musculature, and root pains 
of extreme severity. The paralytic sjunptoms are on the 
whole less diverse, and consist generally of the cranial nerve 
palsies mentioned above. Paralysis of trunk and limb mus- 
culature is rare, but hemiplegia is not unknown. 

ITie characteristic lethargy of the malady is seen in patients 
in whom paralytic symptoms occur, and is commonly absent 
when irritative symptoms predominate. The lethargic patient 
lies apparently asleep, but is readily aroused to answer simple 
questions, relapsing at once into lethargy unless his attention 
is continually held. At night he tends to emerge from this 
state, passing into the occupational delirium already mentioned. 

In a given case, irritative and paralytic symptoms may 
coexist, or the former may give place to the latter during 
the course of the illness. 

Many of the milder cases remain ambulant throughout the 
illness, the occurrence of which is first recognised, sometimes 



LETHARGIC ENCEPHALITIS 853 

months later, by the development of characteristic sequels 
of the disease. 

It is clear that the physical signs found on examination 
vary greatly from case to case, but their general character 
will be evident from what has been said. There is no single 
objective physical sign which is constant, and diagnosis depends 
upon the careful consideration of the clinical course of the 
illness and upon the combinations of signs present. Thus the 
combination of lethargy, ptosis, squint, and diplopia, with a 
mild febrile reaction, is perhaps the commonest clinical 
expression of the disease. No very reliable information is to 
be obtained from the study of the reflexes, which present no 
characteristic changes and vary from case to case. Sensory 
loss is exceptional. In rare instances the malady begins with 
the symptoms of a brisk meningeal reaction, and the presence 
of acute meningitis can be excluded only by examination of the 
cerebrospinal fluid. It is doubtful if fresh cases of tliis malady 
have occurred in this country for some years, and cases so diag- 
nosed not rarely prove to be tuberculous meningitis or cerebral 
tumour. The temptation to make the diagnosis of encephalitis 
because no other can easily be made is one to be resisted. 

Course and Prognosis. — As we have said, the course of the 
disease is extremely variable. Cases in which irritative 
symptoms with restlessness or delirium predominate tend to 
last longer and to end fataUy more often than those of the 
common type with lethargy and cranial nerve palsies. It is 
not possible, however, to speak of any case as mild, since 
profoimdly disabling sequels are as apt to follow a slight and 
transitory initial attack as one of greater apparent severity, 
and although relatively few acute cases end fatally in the 
initial attack, a restoration to normal health is exceptional. 

Sequels. — Sjonptoms indicating focal lesions in the brain 
may develop at any period after recovery from the initiaL 
illness up to three or four years, and certain clinical pictures 
have come to be recognised as indicating the previous occurrence 
of such an illness. Of these, the commonest is that of Parkin- 
sonian rigidity. In rare instances such a condition may 
develop during the acute stage of the malady, but commonly 
it develops insidiously some months or even years after 
recovery from this. The patient becomes progressively slower 
in all his movements, liis face takes on the immobility of 
paralysis agitans, and his gait and stance slowly come to 
resemble those seen in this disease. This so-called post- 
encephalitic Parkinsonism m its early stages is most easily 
seen as the patient moves about and carries on his norm^ 



854 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

activities, and if it escapes the observer’s eye in these circum- 
stances is apt to be missed during a routine clinical examination. 
The facies is fixed and has a somewhat staring expression, due 
to slight retraction of the lids. The gait is slow, the arms are 
not swimg normally, and the whole body seems to be held in 
such a way as to cut down movement to a minimum. When 
the eyelids are closed they develop a fine tremor, and a 
similar tremor of the lips and tongue is common. Passive 
manipulation of the arms reveals a peculiar rigidity of variable 
degree. The hands have the characteristic posture seen in 
paralysis agitans, and the tremor of this disease may be 
present in them. The skin of the face is often greasy, and 
sahva trickles from the angles of the mouth in the severer cases. 

Other residual symptoms are persistent weakness of cranial 
nerves, third, sixth, or seventh, rhythmic muscular twitchings 
of face or other muscles, bizarre and complicated involuntary 
movements of the eyes, face, tongue, trunk, or limb musculature, 
and disorders of respiratory movements. 

In children particularly, mental changes may predominate. 
The child becomes refractory and intractable, and shows 
disorders of moral conduct. In adults, mental apathy, 
persistent drowsiness, and imdue fatigue are common. 

Once these residual symptom-complexes develop they tend 
to progress, and recovery or material improvement is exceptional. 

Treatment. — No drug is knovn to have any certain influ- 
ence upon the acute stage of the disease. Favourable results 
are said to have followed the intravenous injection of sodium 
salicylate (2*5 per cent, solution in normal saline, 10 c.c. 
daily for 8 days). 

As in all Sections and intoxications of the nervous system, 
complete rest in bed is indicated, and should be maintained 
for at least three weeks after symptoms have disappeared. 
Return to normal physical activity should be delayed for at 
least three months. 

The treatment of post-encephalitic Parkinsonism is purely 
symptomatic, and consists in the administration of hyoscine 
hydiobromide (xlr, to gr. by mouth t.i.d.) or of tincture of 
belladonna or of stramonium in increasing doses (up to 30 
minims t.i.d.). It is said that the addition of pilocarpine 
nitrate (iV gr.) to each dose increases tolerance. 

For the oculog 3 T*ic crises a hypodermic injection of hyoscine 
hydrobromide gr.) may be necessary in the more distressing 
cases. 

For the children who show conduct disorders, institutional 
treatment may be necessary. 



HERPES ZOSTER 


855 


POST-INFBOTIVE EnOBPHALITIS 

Rarely, a form of encephalitis may appear in association 
with the exanthemata, measles, smallpox, chicken-pox, mumps 
and vaccination. It develops suddenly on or about the tenth 
to the fourteenth day of the illness. There is a cerebral and a 
spinal (myelitic) form. 

The pathological lesion is strikingly uniform and consists of 
destruction of the myelin sheaths within brain and cord, the 
nerve cells being little affected. It is probable, therefore, 
that we are dealing not with a true virus disease of the nervous 
systcun but with an intoxication of the nervous system associ- 
ated with a systemic virus infection. 

Symptomatology . — In the cerebral form there is a recrudes- 
cence of fever ; the child becomes somnolent, or delirious, and 
may have convulsions. Clinical signs of meningitis may be 
prominent. Cranial nerve palsies, hemiplegia, paraplegia or 
involuntary movements may all occur, with ineontinence of 
urine and faeces. Papilloedema is common. In most cases 
improvement begins in three or four days, and the child passes 
through a phase of irritability to complete recovery. Residual 
paralysis may be left. Some cases, however, end fatally. The 
spinal form consists of paraplegia of sudden onset with reten- 
tion of urine and some sensory loss. If death does not ensue 
within a few days, complete recovery may be expected. 

In both forms the cerebrospinal fluid contains an excess of 
lymphocytes, but the chemical changes of acute meningitis are 
absent. 


HERPES ZOSTER 
(Shingles) 

Clinically, this malady consists in the appearance of an 
acute vesicular eruption within the distribution of a dorsal 
spinal nerve root. The pathological process is an acute 
infective inflammation of a spinal root ganglion, the lesion 
resembling that seen in the anterior horns of the spinal cord 
in acute j>oliomyelitis, though there is no reason to suppose 
that the virus in the two maladies is the same. 

The relationship of herpes zoster to chicken-pox is discussed 
elsewliere (vide p. 53). 

iEtiology. — ^This is believed to be a true virus infection of 
the posterior root ganglion cells, though full confirmation is 
yet lacking. If there be any difference in sex incidence, males 



856 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

are slightly more often affected than females. The malady may 
occur at any age from childhood upwards. The period of 
maximum incidence is said by Head to be adolescence, but 
very conflicting views have been expressed on this point. 
Some authorities maintain that it is commonest in the second 
half of life. When it occurs in elderly persons it is invariably 
a more painful affection than when the subject is young. 

In the majority of cases herpes zoster arises without any 
discoverable cause, and in these circumstances may be regarded 
as an acute specific virus infection of the dorsal root ganglia, 
having an initial phase of febrile disturbance followed by the 
appearance of the specific lesion. 

Confirmatory of this view of the nature of zoster is the 
rarity of second attacks, and the tendency to occur in small 
outbreaks or at certain periods. 

It may occur in the subjects of pulmonary phthisis, in 
individuals taking arsenic, in acute myelitis and in spinal 
caries at the level of the lesion, and occasionally in tabes 
dorsalis. Herpes zoster stands in some as yet unknown rela- 
tionship to chicken-pox ; the appearance of herpes in a family 
being sometimes followed after an interval of fourteen days by 
a case of chicken-pox. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The ganglion is sw’ollen and hyperiemic. 
The vessels are congested and there are numerous minute 
haemorrhages and intense lymphocytic infiltration. Chromato- 
Ijrtic changes are present in the ganglion cells. In cases of long 
standing, secondary glial reaction is the prominent feature. 

The cerebrospinal fluid indicates a meningeal reaction by 
an increased lymphocyte and globulin content. 

Symptomatology. — As in acute poliomyelitis, there may be 
an initial febrile reaction of three or four days’ duration. The 
temperature may reach 102® F. in children. There Ls pain 
from the outset at the site in which the rash is later to apj)ear, 
and if the mid-thoracic region be affected, j)lourisy may l>e 
suspected. The rash appears on the third or fourth day, at 
one or more of the situations in which the cutaneous brancihes 
of the affected nerve root come to the surface, and sprea<is 
along the distribution of the nerve twig from this point. The 
rash develops for from two to six days, appearing first iia an 
erj^thema upon which vesicles filled with clear fluid subsequently 
develop. JVom the fifth to the tenth day the vesicles begin 
to dry up and scab ; ultimately scarring may be loft, particularly 
if the blisters have broken and any infection of the resulting 
shallow uloers has occurred. The pain lasts until the rash 
begins to heal, and may vary from an uncomfortable itching 



SYPHILIS OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


857 


to intense burning pain. In elderly patients, however, it may 
persist for months with great severity and prove intractable to 
treatment. Peculiar to elderly patients is herpes zoster in the 
distribution of the trigeminal nerve, more especially in that of 
the first or ophthalmic division. Vesicles appear on the side 
of the nose and over the brow, and sometimes on the cornea. 
If the comeal ulcers, which result from bursting of the vesicles, 
become infected, severe comeal ulceration may ensue. Occa- 
sionally there is an associated iritis. Rarely ocular palsies 
and ptosis may be associated with trigeminal herpes, just as 
facial palsy may occur with geniculate ganglion herpes (see 
also Facial Paralysis, p. 903). Sometimes, also, we see paralysis 
of muscles imiervaied from the spinal cord segment, the dorsal 
root ganglion of which is affected. Thus herpes of the seventh 
and eighth thoracic ganglion may be accompanied by paralysis 
of the rectus and oblique muscles of the abdominal wall. All 
these paralyses tend to recovery. 

Herpes labialis and herpes febrihs are not related to herpes 
zoster. 

Treatment. — The course of the eruption is uninfluenced by 
treatment. The vesicles are best dusted with a starch or zinc 
oxide x)owder, or a collodion dressing may be applied over the 
whole affected skin area. The latter measure is the best when 
the situation of the eruption allows of it, since it protects the 
burst vesicles from secondary infection and from friction and 
appears to have some analgesic value. Post-lierpetic neuralgia 
is diflicult to relieve, and on occasion it may be necessary to 
use morphia in aged and debihtated subjects whose sleep is 
impaired by pain. Before recourse is had to this, however, 
aspirin, phenacetin, and caffeine citrate, or luminal or tincture 
of gelsemium and bromide may be tried. 


SYPHILIS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Hitherto syphilis has been regarded as the most important 
single factor in the causation of organic nervous disease, but 
with the diminishing incidence of primary syphilis it is probable 
that neurosyphilis will no longer maintain its sinister position 
in this respect, if, indeed, disseminated sclerosis Ls not already 
as common a malady as neurosyphilis in all its forms. 

There is still much that is uncertain in the pathology of 
syphilis as it affects the nervous system, but the following brief 
summary represents the most widely accepted body^of opinion in 
respect of two important points in the aetiology of neurosyphilis. 



858 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


1. The Mobe and Period of Invasion of the Nervous 
System. — In a small proportion of cases of primary syphilis, 
at a stage when the Wassermann reaction in the blood is still 
negative, examination of the cerebrospinal fluid reveals signs of 
a meningeal reaction, namely, an increased lymphocyte and 
globulin content in the fluid. This proportion steady increases 
through the primary stage of syphilis, and during the acute 
secondary stage approximately 60 per cent, of aU syphilitics 
present signs of a brisk meningeal reaction. 

This reaction is undoubtedly due to invasion of the meninges 
by the spirochsete, and it is now believed that such a meningeal 
inflammatory reaction is an essential condition of invasion of 
the central nervous system by spirochaetes, and that when such 
invasion occurs it is at this early stage of infection and at no 
other. It appears, therefore, that the foundations of subsequent 
neuros}q)hilis are laid during the primary and acute secondary 
stages of the infection. Unfortunately, in the present state 
of knowledge we cannot tell whether, in a given case, the 
meningeal reaction is accompanied by invasion of the nervous 
tissues, since this invasion in the great majority of cases gives 
rise to no special symptoms at this stage. 

Usually, whether invasion has occurred or not, the cerebro- 
spinal fluid returns to a normal state. If invasion has not 
occurred it remains normal, but in other cases it later presents 
evidence of a fresh meningeal reaction, which responds incom- 
pletely, if at all, to antisyphilitic treatment. It is in such cases 
that the later development of neurosyphilis is to be feared. 

It is probable that the meninges are the sole channel of 
access of the spirochaete to the nervous system. 

2. The Lesion of Neurosyphius. — The invasion of the 
central nervous system gives rise to no signs of pathological 
change for a period of years in most instances, and the cause 
of this latency has not yet been satisfactorily explained. It 
cannot be due to an extremely slow process of parench 3 rmatous 
degeneration of nerve cells and fibres, and is more likely to be 
due to a delayed hjp)ersensitiveness of a parenchyma actually 
invaded long since. Histological investigations of the lesions 
in neurosyphilis indicate that there are two main types of 
lesion ; a so-called meningo-vascular syphilis, in which there 
are signs of active pathological change in vascular and 
supporting tissues, with inconsiderable damage to the nervous 
elements ; and a so-called central or parenchymatous syphilis, 
in which signs of meningo-vascular lesion are inconsiderable 
and not active, and in which degenerative changes in nerve 
cells and fibres predominate. 



SYPHILIS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


859 


It was formerly supposed that these lesions represented two 
essentially distinct syphilitic processes, but it is now widely 
accepted that parenchymatous lesions are invariably secondary 
to meningo-vascular changes, although these may have ceased 
to be active long before the clinical signs of parenchymatous 
degeneration appear. Further, the view that the lesions of 
so-called parenchymatous syphilis are systemic, involving 
certain neuronal systems and these alone, has also been found 
to be untenable, thus removing one of the strongest grounds 
for a belief in a pure neuronal degeneration as a special 
expression of neurosyphilis. 

We may say, therefore, that in the nervous system, as else- 
where in the body, the essential lesion of syphilis is an arteritis, 
with which is associated a perivascular lymphangitis, and a 
meningitis when the vessels affected lie in the meninges. The 
arteries show intimal thickening with perivascular infiltration 
of the adventitia by l 3 Tnphocytes and plasma cells. Such a 
lesion forms the basis of gumma formation. The details of 
the lesion in the several varieties of neurosyphilis will be 
considered when these are described. 

The Cerebrospinal Fluid in Neurosyphilis. — Some 
further details on this subject are necessary. 

1. Primary and Secondary Stages . — During the primary 
stage of syphilis, a meningeal reaction is present in from 15 
to 20 per cent, of cases. The earliest change is an increase in 
the lymphocyte content of the fluid. As the secondary stage 
advances, the lymphocytes increase in number, ranging from 
25 to 100 or more per cubic millimetre ; also some polymorpho- 
nuclear and plasma cells may be seen. Protein excess does 
not usually appear until the secondary stage is reached. A 
positive Wassermann reaction is exceptional, occurring in some 
10 to 15 per cent, of cases. 

After the passing of the acute secondary stage, whether the 
case be treated or not, the lymphocytosis disappears or becomes 
considerably reduced, but a recurrent and very brisk meningeal 
reaction may develop, occasionally associated with clinical 
signs of neurosyphilis (optic neuritis, cranial, and spinal nerve 
lesions). A high pleocytosis may now be found in the cerebro- 
spinal fluid, amounting to 1000 cells per cubic millimetre 
(lymphoc 3 rtes, polynuclear, and plasma cells), together with 
a strongly positive protein and Wassermann reaction. This 
reaction is generally responsive to active antisyphilitic 
treatment. 

2. Latent Period. — The second and third years after 
infection. During this period about a fifth of all cases of 



860 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

syphilis present a lymphocytosis, protein excess, and positive 
Wassermann reaction in the fluid. If the fluid be normal 
during this period the subject is unlikely to develop neuro- 
syphilis later, but there is no high degree of certainty on this 
point, as normal cerebrospinal fluids have been found at this 
stage in s3T)hilitic subjects who later develop general paralysis. 
This is probably an exceptional state of affairs. 

3. Tertiary Syphilis , — Unless there is syphilitic meningitis 
the fluid at this period will be normal. In acute syphilitic 
meningitis at this stage the cerebrospinal fluid contains up to 
600 lymphocytes per cubic millimetre, up to 100 mg. of protein 
per 100 C.C., and a strongly positive Wassermann reaction. 
The blood Wassermann is alro positive. In chronic syphilitic 
meningitis these changes are present, but are of less intensity 
than in the acute process. 

In syphilitic cerebral vascular disease there will be no 
characteristic changes in the cerebrospinal fluid unless there 
be an associated meningitis. A relatively low lymphocytosis 
and protein increase, with or without a positive Wassermann 
reaction, is the rule. The blood Wassermann is positive. In 
cases of syphilitic hemiplegia a negative cerebrospinal fluid 
Wassermann may be obtained in about half the cases. 

In congenital syphilis the cerebrospinal fluid shows very 
inconstant changes, but with juvenile tabes or general paralysis 
the characteristic changes in the fluid are found. 

4. In Tabes Dorsalis cerebrospinal fluid changes of 
moderate intensity are the rule. The cell count varies from 
10 to 80 lymphocjdes per cubic millimetre. There is a slight 
or moderate increase in protein and a positive Wassermann 
reaction in blood or fluid, or in both. The last-named reaction 
is negative, however, in the fluid and blood in 25 per cent, 
of cases. When a positive fluid Wassermann is present it is 
rarely influenced by antisyphilitic treatment. A reduction in 
the cell count is more easily obtained, but is not necessarily 
accompanied by any improvement in the clinical condition. 
Further, the clinical progress of a case of tabes dorsalis is not 
necessarily reflected by the condition of the cerebrospinal 
fluid, which is, in consequence, of little value as a guide to 
treatment. 

5. In General Paralysis of the Insane the pressure of the 
cerebrospinal fluid is raised, the cell count may range from 
50 to 200 cells per cubic millimetre (lymphocytes, mononuclears, 
plasma cells, macrophages). The protein content is increased, 
and the Wassermann reaction is always positive in the fluid 
and almost always so in the blood. Apart from the cell count, 



CEREBROSPINAL SYPHILIS 861 

which always falls from repeated lumbar puncture alone, these 
abnormalities are irresponsive to treatment. 

Colloidal Reactions in the Cerebrospinal Fluid . — In certain 
nervous diseases the protein content of the cerebrospinal fluid 
undergoes an increase, the albumin fraction always exceeding 
in amount the globulin fraction of this protein. In neuro- 
syphiUs and in disseminated sclerosis, however, the globulin is 
relatively high and almost equals the albumin present. 
Associate with this relatively high globulin content, the 
cerebrospinal fluid develops the power of precipitating the 
particles of a colloidal suspension to which it is added. It 
has been foimd that colloidal gold is delicately responsive in 
this way, a fact that is the basis of Lange’s colloidal gold 
reaction, which is carried out as follows : a constant quantity 
of a standard suspension of colloidal gold is added to 10 graded 
dilutions of cerebrospinal fluid (from 1 in 10, to 1 in 10,000). 
In general paralysis the gold is precipitated in the first six 
dilutions ; in tabes, precipitation is maximal in the third and 
fourth dilutions ; while in meningitic fluids precipitation is 
greatest in the sixth to eighth dilutions. Thus so-called 
‘‘ paretic,” luetic,” and “ meningitic ” curves can be plotted. 

In disseminated sclerosis the combination of a negative 
Wassermann reaction in the fluid with a paretic curve is 
found. 

The practical importance of these reactions can easily be 
overestimated. The occasions on which they provide informa- 
tion not otherwise obtainable are limited. Thus it is rare 
indeed that a diagnosis of disseminated sclerosis really depends 
upon the result of this reaction, and its chief value is in 
differentiating certain cases of general paralysis from those 
of meningo -vascular cerebral syphilis. In the former anti- 
syphilitic treatment leaves the reaction unchanged, but in the 
latter a change from a paretic to a luetic curve may occur. 


CEREBROSPINAL SYPHILIS 

The form of syphilis in which the lesions are predominantly 
meningo-vascular may involve the brain and cord separately, 
or both together. The morbid anatomy is the same in each 
case, but the clinical pictures will be described separately. 

The onset of symptoms is generally first noted towards 
the end of the five-year period after infection, but there are 
sometimes clinical indications of acute syphilitic meningitis 
during the secondary stage of syphilis. 



862 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Morbid Anatomy. — It has been stated that the essential 
S3rphilitic lesion in the nervous system, as elsewhere in the 
body, is an arteritis. In the nervous system there is an 
associated perivascular lymphangitis. It is the vascular and 
supporting tissues which are thus primarily involved, the 
nervous elements being secondarily affected, by pressure, in- 
filtration, or intoxication. The multiplication of the spirochsete 
in the perivascular lymph spaces leads to an infiammatory 
reaction with ceUular infiltration. This may take the form 
of a diffuse vascular granulation tissue, or of local gummatous 
masses. Gumrnata generally arise either in the dura or in the 
pia-arachnoid, the latter being the more common situation. 
They form nodules of varying shape, and when they occur 
over the convexity of the hemisphere they are lentiform, 
compressing and infiltrating the subjacent brain, and some- 
times giving rise to the signs of cerebral tumour. At the base 
of the brain they tend to form small nodules situated in a 
mass of thickened and inflamed pia-arachnoid and forming 
part of a gummatous meningitis. Gummalotts meningitis 
may occur over any part of the brain, but is most frequent 
in the interpeduncular space, where it involves the menin- 
geal sheaths of the cranial nerves and of the chiasma. 
To the naked eye the pia-arachnoid is thickened and 
gelatinous, and the subarachnoid space contains exudate. 
The vessels entering into and derived from the circle of 
Willis are also involved. 

Syphilitic Meningo-myelitis is the common form of spinal 
syphilis and is a pathological process like that already described. 
The lesion is generally localised to several adjacent segments of 
the cord, and tends to produce the signs of a focal transverse 
cord lesion. ITie pia-arachnoid becomes adherent to the sub- 
jacent cord, which is infiltrated by the gummatous process with 
the production of a varying degree of myelitis. 

Involvement of the spinal dura leads to the production of 
pachymeningitis cervicalis hypertrophica, a condition of primary 
thickening of the dura which in the cervical region is swollen, 
hard, and may completely fill the vertebral canal. The nerve 
roots are compressed and atrophy, and the cord itself undergoes 
some degree of constriction, and shows a varying degree of 
secondary sclerosis sometimes with cavitation. 

Symptomatology— (a) Cerebral Syphilis.— There are two 
clinical types of cerebral 83q)hilis : that produced by gummatous 
meningitis at the base of the brain, and that due to syphilitic 
endarteritis of the central branches of the middle cerebral 
artery. In both forms the development of objective ph^nsical 



CEREBROSPINAL SYPHILIS 863 

signs is preceded by premonitory symptoms. These are head- 
ache, sometimes of great severity and usually worse during the 
night, and mental and emotional changes of varying degree. 
The fine edge is taken off the patient’s intellectual capacity and 
he becomes forgetful and irritable. DeUrium or apathy may be 
present. After some weeks or months of this prodromal stage, 
objective signs develop. In the case of gummatous meningitis 
the signs are cranial nerve paralyses, which may be unilateral, 
although the pathological process is bilateral. Pupillary 
abnormalities (myosis, inequality, and irregularity of outline, 
deficient or absent light reaction), squint, diplopia, ptosis, 
deafness, and tinnitus, facial weakness and sensory changes 
over the face, all serve to indicate the nerves involved. With 
meningitis on the convexity of the hemispheres, Jacksonian 
fits and transient hemiparesis or aphasia may be present. 

In syphilitic endarteritis obliterans of the central branches 
of the middle cerebral artery, cerebral thrombosis may result 
with hemiplegia. The symptomatology of this condition has 
already been described in the chapter on cerebral vascular 
disease (vide p. 803). 

(6) Spinal Syphilis. — AJthough the clinical pictures of 
spinal sjq)hili8 vary greatly and fall into several groups, the 
underlying pathological process is remarkably uniform, varying 
more in acuteness than in kind. 

1. Transverse Meningo-myelitis. — This may be a pro- 
cess localised to a few segments of the cord and productive of 
the symptoms of a transverse lesion of the cord, a transverse 
myelitis. Like the signs of cerebral syphilis, those of spinal 
syphilis are preceded by premonitory symptoms. These are 
pain in the back, girdle, or other root pains, and numbness 
in the extremities, yigns of interference with the functions 
of the cord come on with a rapidity which varies from case 
to case. Where there is much arterial disease with softening of 
the cord, paraplegia with sensory loss and sphincter paralysis 
develop with great rapidity, and an almost complete transverse 
lesion may ensue within a few days. The abdominal reflexes 
are lost below the level of the lesion, which is cx)mmonly mid- 
thoracic ; there is sensory loss and weakness of the legs that 
may be spastic from the onset or rapidlj’^ become so, often with 
retention or distension with overflow. In severe cases, total 
paraplegia with bed-sores may be present. 

2. Erb’s Syphilitic Paraplegia. — much less acute and 
more slowly progressive form of moningo-myelitis of the 
thoracic region of the cord is knowm b}’^ this name. There is 
relatively little weakness, but when the patient is standing or 



864 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


walking the legs become intensely spastic and the gait is 
spastic and shuffling. There is also little cutaneous sensory 
loss, but more marked loss of the sense of position and 
of vibration sensation. The sphincters, also, are severely 
impaired. The condition may be present for many years 
before the power of walking is lost. Root pains may be a 
prominent symptom. 

3. Amyotrophic Mehingo-myelitis (spinal progressive 
muscular atrophy of syphilitic origin). — ^A form of meningo- 
myelitis affecting the cervical region of the cord may produce a 
clkdcal picture closelj’ resembling that of progressive muscular 
atrophy. The signs are atonic atrophy beginning in the 
small hand muscles, in tlie shoulder muscles, or in those of the 
leg. This may be unilateral or bilateral, and is often preceded 
by root pains. There may be spastic paresis of the legs, 
some impairment of vibration sense in the legs, and loss of 
sphincter control. The Argyll-Robertson pupil is present in 
an appreciable proportion of these cases. The blood Wasser- 
mann reaction is positive in two-thirds of the cases, and the 
cerebrospinal fluid gives a positive reaction in all imtreated 
cases. This condition may be present m association with 
tabes dorsalis. 

4. Pachymeningitis Cervicalis Hypertrophic a. — In this 
there are root com])ression sjuiiptoms : pains radiating dovm 
the arms, wasting and weakness of arm and hand muscles, 
with alterations in the arm jerks and sensorj’ impairment. 
The legs show a condition of spastic weakness. 

Diagnosis. — These various clinical forms of spinal syphilis 
may have to be differentiated from several B])inal cord discuses : 
infective myelitis, disseminated sclerosis, compression of the 
cord, progressive muscular atrojdiy. In all cases the examina- 
tion of the blood and cerebrospinal fluid should be made, and 
other signs of syjfliilLs sought for. l^upillary abnormalities of 
the type described ahovo maj^ afford the necessary clinical 
confirmation. A history of syidiilitic infection is of importance, 
though the absence of such a history is of no value. 

These criteria must also govern the differential diagnosis of 
cerebral syj)hilis. It must be remembered that both cerebral 
tumour and syphilitic infection are common occurrences, and 
that the presenc^e of a positive blood Wassennann reaction in 
a case of suspected cerebral tumour is not adequate reason for 
regarding the latter as a gumma. 

Prognosis. — Recent cases of cerebral syphilis or of spinal 
meningo-rnyelitis resjK)nd well to energetic antisyphilitic treat- 
ment. lAing-Htanding cases, on the other hand, respond less 



DEMENTIA PARALYTICA 


865 


well, and even though the pathological process be arrested, 
some residual disability tends to remain. Erb’s syphilitic 
paraplegia usually responds little if at all to treatment, while 
amyotrophic meningo-myelitis may be arrested but seldom 
cured in the sense of recovery. 


DEMENTIA PARALYTICA 
{General Paralysis of the Insane) 

This is essentially a syphilitic affection. Males are affected 
far more frequently than females. The onset occurs from ten 
to twenty years after primary infection, that is, commonly 
between the ages of thirty to forty-five. The percentage 
of syphilitic subjects who develop this malady is probably 
extremely small. Occasionally the subjects of congenital 
S3q)hilis develop the malady in childhood. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The skull bones are dense, and beneath 
the dura there may be signs of old subdural haematomata 
(chronic haunorrhagic pachymeningitis). The brain is shrunken 
and diminished in weight. The pia-arachnoid is thickened and 
opaque, and may be adherent to the subjacent brain. The 
convolutions lire atro])hic and the sulci correspondingly wide. 
The ependyma is “ frosted ” in appearance and is seen to be 
studded with tiny, closely -set granules. Microscopically, the 
maximal degree of change is found in the frontal lobes ; the 
vessels are dilated and show' signs of proliferation ; their 
walls are thickened, and the perivascular spaces infiltrated 
wuth h^mphocytes, j)hisma, and other cells. There is marked 
neuroglial reaction. The nerve cells reveal various stages of 
chrornatolytic degeneration, and the superficial ner\^e fibres 
are also degenerated. Spirocha^tes may be found. 

Symptomatology. — There are various clinical pictures char- 
acteristic of the disease, esjiecially in its earliest stages. In 
some subjects mental deterioration is the earliest symptom. 
In others objective neurological signs are prominent from the 
first, with cori'esponding symptoms. 

Mental Symptoms . — The essential fixture is a slowly pro- 
gressive deterioration of the intellect, the most complex and 
most recently acquired faculties being first and most severely 
hit. Judgment, memory, and receptivity begin to fail. The 
standard of conduct falls off, and the patient becomes careless 
of the conventions and may develop moral aberrations. He 
becomes suspicious and irritable, and impatient of any kind 
of restraint. He may be sullen and depressed, or exalt^ and 

55 



866 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


boastful. He uses his financial resources rashly and may ruin 
his family as a result. The familiar picture of grandiose ideas 
with absurd boastfulness is, perhaps, not the common one, and 
most patients are depressed and introspective. These changes 
develop gradually and are best noticed by the patient's 
immediate family circle, which suffers most severely from his 
aberrations. With the passing of time, memory and judgment 
progressively fail, and ultimately a severe grade of dementia 
develops. 

Associated with this mental picture is the presence of 
objective physical signs of organic nervous disease. In the 
early stages these are : unequal and irregular pupils which 
react badly to light, tremor of the lips and tongue and of the 
hands. Articulation is slurring. Defects in the speech function 
appear later. A partial primary optic atroi)hy is common. 
The reflexes show progressive alteration, the tendon jerks 
becoming brisker than normal and the plantar responses 
becoming of the extensor, or Babinski, type. Gradually 
bilateral spastic paresis develops, with loss of sphincter control, 
and ultimately the j)atient becomes a helpless, bedridden 
dement. This progress is j)unctuated in the early stages by 
transient apoplectiform and ej)ileptiform seizures, the so-called 
congestive attacks." They are associated with transient 
hemiplegia or aphasia. Again, acute maniacal outbursts or 
sudden phases of exaltation may occur. Remission of 
symptoms is common, the patient improving in a most 
remarkable fashion and retaining the improved level of mental 
and physical health for some months. 

Occasionally the symptoms of general paralysis may be 
associated with certain signs of tabes dorsalLs, the so-called 
taboparesis. The clinical course of this condition, however, 
is much slower and longer drawn out than that of general 
paralysis alone. 

Course and Prognosis. — The malaily usually runs its course to 
a fatal issue w ithin three or four years. More acute erases occur 
in which death ensues within a year. The various clinic^al 
varieties have each their characteristic course and duration. 

Diagnosis. — This may present difficulties in the initial stages 
in those cases in which objective sign.s are scanty. The patient 
has no insight into the alteration in his mental and emotional 
state, which may not be evident unless an independent hisk)ry 
can \ye obtained from his relatives. In many cases it is by 
information derived from a patient s wife that the presence of 
definite mental deterioration can alone l>c discovered, and the 
patient s story should always lie compared with that obtained 



TABES DORSALIS 


867 


from some competent witness. It is in the case of the depressed 
hypochondriac subject that these difficulties are most in 
evidence, and a diagnosis of neurasthenia should be made with 
reserve in a middle-aged man of this type until general 
paralysis has been definitely excluded by careful clinical 
examination and examination of the blood and cerebrospinal 
fluid. The objective signs to be sought for are pupillary 
abnormalities, tremor of the lips and tongue, shght slurring 
of speech, and alterations in the reflexes. 

Another source of difficulty is the close resemblance which 
some cases of cerebral syphilis bear to general paralysis, and 
in this case a differential diagnosis may be impossible without 
some j>eriod of observation and one or more examinations of 
the cerebrospinal fluid {vide }). cS.lO). 

Treatment will be dealt with later {vide p. 876). 


TABES DORSALIS 

This common malady of the nervous system is essentially 
syphilitic in origin. It makes its appearance from five to 
twenty years after infection, and is much more common in 
men than in women. It is occasionally a result of congenital 
syphilis, and Ukc general paralysis may exist in husband and 
wife, wiien one })artner has acquired syphilis from the other. 

Morbid Anatomy. — On naked eye msi)eetion, the dorsal 
columns of the cord are seen to be shrunken and translucent in 
appearance on section of the cord. The dorsal roots are also 
similarly shrunken and have a pinkish, gelatinous apj>earance. 
The change is most marked in the lumbar and thoracic regions 
of the cord. Other evidence of neurosyphilis may be present 
such as basal meningitis and meningo-myelitis. 

The evolution of the essential lesion in tabes is still a 
matter of controversy. While the signs and symptoms of the 
disease are a consequence of the degeneration of the exogenous 
fibres of the posterior columns of the cord, as these he in the 
root entry zone, it is not certainlj knowm whether this 
degeneration is a primary parenchymatous change or is 
secondary to a local meningitis of the posterior roots outside 
the cord. It seems probable, howover, that the first explanation 
w'iU prove to bo the correct one. 

The short and medium length fibres tend to degenerate 
earlier than the long fibres and, like other nerve fibre degenera- 
tions, this process does not extend beyond the synaj>se in 
which the affected fibre ends. The degeneration in tabes is 



868 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


therefore confined to the exogenous dorsal root fibres, and can 
be traced up through the dorsal columns of the cord from 
lumbar region to the posterior column nuclei in the medulla. 
The cranial nerve palsies which are sometimes seen in cases 
of tabes are due to a meningo-vascular process such as has 
already been described. The primar}^ optic atrophy of tabes 
is also the result of a similar process in the sheath of the optic 
nerve, and is not, as was formerly supposed, a primary syphilitic 
degeneration of the optic nerve neurones. 

The pupillary changes of tabes are even more obscure in 
their origin than is the essential lesion of this disease. Neither 
the view that there is a degeneration of light reflex fibres, 
nor that which invokes changes in the ciliarj^ nerves is 
entirely satisfactory, and the question remains an open 
one. 

A common post-mortem finding in subjects dead of tabes is 
a sypliilitic aortitis or aneurysm. 

Symptomatology. — Since tabes dorsalis develops very slowly, 
not all its physical signs are equally early in development, and 
the malady may be readily recognisable at a time when some 
of its so-called cardinal signs are absent. Further, it may be 
arrested at any stage of its evolution and thus continue 
indefinitely to })resent an incomplete clinical picture. Hence 
the old division of the clinical course into pre-ataxic and 
ataxic ” stages is fallacious and useless. Finally, in some 
cases there is no noticeable disability, or subjective symptom, 
which is obviously nervous in origin, and the disease may be 
discovered only during the course of a routine examination 
of the patient. Since it is a disease of the primary^ afferent 
neurone its signs and symptoms must necessarily be of the 
following character : jiains and paraesthesiae, sensory impair- 
ment, ataxy of movement of sensory origin, loss of tendon 
reflexes, muscular hypotonia. To these we may add impair- 
ment of spliincter control and of sexual desire and power, 
trophic lesions, and pupillary anomalies. 

In its early stages the common subjective symptoms are 
pains. The most tjqjical of these are the “ lightning pains,’’ 
which are verj’ rarely absent and which may antedate all 
other symptoms by a j)eriod of years. Since the tabetic lesion 
is in the lumbar and thoracic regions of the cord, these pains 
are present in the lower limbs and trunk. They are sharp and 
sudden in incidence, and come in paroxysms which are more 
severe and frequent in wet, cold weather. They rarely nm 
uj) or down the length of the limb, but seem to strike into 
the limb from outside and are described as ‘‘ stabs of pain,” 



TABES DORSALIS 


869 


“ like a needle being stuck into the leg.” They are common 
in the heel, calf, and region of the foot. Pains of a similar 
character may be present in the thoracic waU. 

These pains vary in severity, and when not intense may be 
interpreted by the patient as due to ‘‘rheumatism” or some 
other supposedly minor ailment, and may thus not be seriously 
regarded by him. Various other pains and parsesthesiae in 
limbs and trunk may also be complained of. 

On examination, the following objective sensory disturb- 
ances are usually found. Over the front of the thorax, from 
the level of the second rib to that of the lower costal margin, 
where it forms a cuirass of sensory change, is an area of 
analgesia, and sometimes of tactile and thermal anaesthesia or 
hypoaesthesia also. This area may extend down the medial 
aspect of the upper limbs to the little and ring fingers. The 
region of the j)erineum may also be similarly insensitive, 
especially in those patients in whom alteration in sphincter 
control is an early symptom. In respect of deep structures, 
the tendo AchUhs is almost always painless on pressure, or if 
painful sensibility be retained in any degree, its conduction is 
delayed and the patient cries out one or more seconds after 
pressure is put upon the tendon. The ulnar nerve at the 
elbow may also be relatively insensitive to pressure. Over the 
nose and upper lip, in those patients with an Argyll-Robertson 
pupillary reaction, there is commonly an area of analgesia, the 
so-called “ tabetic mask ” of Duchenne. Examination of the 
Umbs for the sense of position may reveal some impairment. 
Passive movement of the great toe, the patient having his 
eyes shut, may be possible through an abnormally wide range 
before it is perceived, and in the heel-knee test, carried out 
under the same conditions, the error of projection of the heel 
may be considerable. When this form of sensory loss is 
marked, there will be some degree of ataxy of gait, or if not, 
then some Rombergism will be present. That is to say, when 
the patient is deprived of the use of fusion, the impairment of 
sense of position leads to some unsteadiness of stance and to 
swaying that does not occur when vision is employed. Rom- 
bergism is a sign of defect in the sense of position in the legs 
and will occur in any malady in w^hich there is this form of 
sensory disturbance. It must be emphasised, however, that 
in the early stage of progressive tabes, or in arrested cases, 
neither Rombergism nor ataxy of stance oi gait' may be 
present. In cervical tabes, similar disorders of the upper 
limbs may be found. 

Reflexes . — The afferent limb of the reflex arcs concerned 



870 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

in these reactions being involved, the tendon jerks in the legs 
slowly diminish in activity and finally disappear. The first 
to go are the ankle jerks, and their disappearance may precede 
that of the knee jerks by a considerable period. Therefore, 
retention of the knee jerks does not necessarily exclude the 
presence of recognisable tabes. The arm jerks tend to go even 
later than the knee jerks and may be retained for an indefinite 
time, except in involvement of the cervical posterior root 
fibres. 

The Pupils , — From the onset of the disease the pupils 
become progressively smaller, and ultimately a high degree 
of myosis obtains. Simultaneously they lose their circular 
outline and become unequal in diameter and the reaction to 
light wanes until it is lost. While this loss of reaction to light 
is perhaps the most important feature of the pupillary changes 
in tabes, myosis is, sooner or later, an almost invariable 
accompaniment of this loss and was so regarded by Argyll- 
Robertson after whom the phenomenon is named. Reaction 
to accommodation is retained imtil the terminal stage of the 
malady, when it too may be lost. 

The common sphincter defect is hesitancy of micturition 
with a tendency to dribbling incontinence after a voluntary 
act of micturition. Impairment and early loss of both sexual 
desire and power is a very common symptom at this stage 
of the malady but is not invariable. The cutaneous refiexes 
(abdominal and cremasteric) are retained and are usually very 
brisk throughout the malady. The plantar responses are of 
normal t;y 7 >e. 

We may sum up the signs and symptoms of early tabes 
dorsalis, or of non -progressive cases of the disease, as follows : 
lightning pains, objective sensory disturbances on face, trunk, 
and lower limbs, diminution or loss of the knee and ankle jerks, 
the presence of Rombergism or of ataxy of gait and stance in a 
proi>ortion of patients, but not in all, the presence of a varying 
degree of abnormalit}’ in the apj)earance and reaction of the 
pupils, and some defect in sexual function and in sphincter 
control. 

In the more advanced stage of progressive cases, the 
physical signs mentioned above become more evident, though 
the characteristic pains may wane and ahnost cease except 
as occasional phenomena. The loss of sense of position in 
the legs deads to marked ataxj^ sometimes of a degree which 
completely takes the patient off his feet and givea him a 
superficial apj>earance of being partially paralysed. However, 
bed tests of muscular power reveal that this is not impaired, 



TABES DORSALIS 


871 


although co-ordination may be grossly disordered. The arms 
may be similarly affected. 

Sensory loss tends to involve larger areas of the trunk and 
limbs, although the abdominal wall retains sensibility in some 
patients for a long period. 

All the tendon reflexes may disappear. In the terminal 
stages of tabes the pupils become extremely small and the 
reaction to accommodation is commonly lost, the pupils being 
immobile. 

Sphincter control tends to become more defective, and 
incontinence of urine may be a distressing symptom. It is 
often accompanied by profound loss of sensation over the 
perineum and in the external genitals, so that the passage of 
urine and faeces, and even of a catheter, cannot be felt. The 
bladder invariably contains several ounces of residual urine, 
and is commonly infected. The presence of chronic infection 
from this source is in part responsible for the pallor and 
cachetic appearance of most tabetics of long standing. 

Among the inconstant symptoms of tabes are the 
following : — 

Ataxy. — Many cases of tabes run their whole or a great 
part of their course without the development of this disability. 
Its absence indicates the integrity of those afferent fibres 
which subserve the sense of position and of movement. On 
the other hand, gross ataxy of the lower limbs may develop 
acutely, either spontaneously or after confinement of the 
patient to bed from injury or some intercurrent malady. Such 
an acute ataxy may first draw attention to the malady in 
cases which have previously been free from marked subjective 
symptoms of any kind. When it is severe in degree, standing 
may bo quite impossible owing to the complete absence of 
control of movement. In less severe grades the patient stands 
with a wide base, and as he walks keeps his gaze intent upon 
his feet. These are raised over high and are stamped down, 
heel first, with undue force. The legs are widely separated 
and perform many adventitious movements from the combined 
effects of ataxy and voluntary efforts at correction. 

Visceral Crises. — Of these the commonest is the gastric 
crisis, which in its complete form consists of an attack of 
acute abdominal pain with vomiting, lasting for from two or 
three to seven or more days. The vomiting may be severe 
and provoked by food. Hypersensitiveness of the skin over 
the epigastrium is a common accompaniment of gastric crises 
and may be present in the subject at other times. In some 
instances, vomiting may occur without pain. Tabetic patients 



872 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

with gastric crises are frequently subjected to laparotomy on 
an erroneoixs diagnosis of some acute local lesion when a 
routine examination of the nervous system has not been made, 
an occurrence which is rendered the more easy as the patient 
may, spontaneously, make no other complaint than one of pain 
and vomiting. It may be admitted, however, that the 
recognition of renal colic or of a ruptured gastric ulcer may 
be a matter of extreme difficulty in a tabetic, in whom not 
less than in others these conditions may be found. 

Less frequent are laryngeal crises, attacks of stridor and 
dyspnoea occurring at short intervals over a period of one or 
more hours. Abductor paralysis of the vocal cords may 
follow a larjmgeal crisis as a temporary state, or may be a 
permanent condition apart from crises. Attacks of tenesmus 
(rectal crises) or of painful micturition (vesical crises) are 
also known. 

Although the subject may be very distressed during the 
period of a crisis, a fatal termination does not occur. 

Optic Atrophy. — In an appreciable number of tabetics, 
optic atrophy develops and leads to progrcvssive failure of 
vision, and generally to blindness, with the ophthalmo8co})ic 
appearance of a primary atro])hy of the disc. The two eyes 
are generally affected, but not simultaneously. It was 
formerly held that the presence of optic atrophy led to an 
arrest of the tabetic process in the so-called “ pre-ataxic 
stage,’ ^ but a more correct way of expressing the rarity of 
advanced tabes in the subjects of optic atrophy Ls to say that 
in those cases in which the two lesions coexist the optic nerve 
bears the brunt of the disease. Tabetic optic atrophy is 
invariably accompanied by the Argyll-Robeiiaon pupil and 
generally by loss of both knee and ankle jerks, and by the 
cutaneous sensory changes described above. 

Trophic Lesions. — These may involve the skin and sub- 
cutaneous tissues, or joint and bones. The perforating ulcer 
on the ball of the foot is the familiar examj)lc of the former. 
It usually arises under a pre-existent callosity. This becomes 
separated from the deeper tissues, a blister or hamiorrhage 
occxirs, the deep tissues become infected, and the callosity 
sloughs out, leaving a septic ulcer which does not heal. 

It not infrequently happens that the patients in whom this 
occurs seek meffical advice for this lesion, and not on acc*ount 
of any other tabetic symptoms. The malady tends to nm a 
peculiarly latent course in those cases where this 8U|)erficial 
lesion occurs, and is often non-progressive. The osteo- 
arthrofiathy of Charcot (Charcot’s joint) is the other familiar 



TABES DORSALIS 


873 


trophic lesion. The change is generally precipitated by some 
injury or strain on the joint. A rapid, painless effusion into 
the joint cavity follows, and then bony changes begin. These 
may consist of rarefaction, or of rarefaction accompanied by 
irregular new bone formation. Destruction of the joint 
surfaces follows. The joint soon becomes abnormally mobile, 
and a condition of flail joint ensues when the knee is involved. 
Other joints affected are the ankle, hip, wrist, and elbow. In 
syringomyeha a similar condition is not uncommon, the upper 
limb joints being the usual seat of the lesion in this case. 
The lumbar spine is sometimes affected. Rarefaction of long 
bones may lead to spontaneous fracture. As with perforating 
ulcers, the case may in other respects run a latent non- 
progressive course. 

Ocular Palsies and Amyotraphy of the upper limb muscles 
may occur in tabes from associated syphilitic meningitis. 
Ptosis, squint, and dij)lopia, especially the first-named, are 
the common cranial nerve palsies. The ptosis together with 
the myosis gives the patient a characteristically sleepy 
appearance. 

Visceral syphilis may also be present in the subjects of tabes, 
s>'philitic aortitis and aortic aneurysm being the commonest 
lesions. General paralysis or spinal meningo-myelitis may 
also complicate tabes. 

Juvenile tabes in congenital syphilitics is comparatively 
rare, and when it occurs is associated with optic atrophy 
more frequently than is the tabes of acquired 8jq)hilis. The 
familiar stigmata of congenital syphilis maj^ be absent from 
the subject of juvenile tabes. 

Diagnosis. — Although tabes is a common malady, and one 
readily detected by even the most rapid routine examination of 
the nervous system, there are few nervous diseases in w^hich 
diagnosis is so often unwarrantably delayed or so frequently 
missed. Among the reasons for this is the fact that observers 
exj)ect to find the sum total of physical signs at every stage of 
the malady, and some of these being absent — as they invariablj^ 
are in the initial period of its development — they either fail to 
identify the disease or shrink from the responsibility of diagnosis 
upon incomplete evidence. Another important factor is the 
extremely variable subjective early symptomatology of tabes. 
Thus the patient may seek medical advice for attacks of 
abdominal pain and vomiting, for failure of vision, for diplopia, 
for pains in the legs, for joint lesions, or for bladder disturbances. 
Exclusive attention to the local symptom leads to a neglect to 
examine the nervous system and to a failure to recognise the 



874 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


presence of tabes. Moreover, it is a common experience that 
the subject of lightning pains, having decided that he has 
rheumatism in his legs, answers the question as to the presence 
of pain by a negative. 

Early diagnosis rests upon the presence of lightning pains, 
the sensory changes described above, diminished or absent 
ankle jerks — the knee jerks being possibly normal — pupillary 
abnormalities, loss of pain sense in the tendo Achillis, and 
loss of testicular sensation. A history of syphilitic infection 
and the presence of any one of the above signs should lead 
to a suspicion of tabes and to an investigation of the blood 
and cerebrospinal fluid. The changes in the latter are described 
elsewhere (see p. 800). 

Among the other diseases from which tabes has to be 
differentiated is multiple peripheral neuritis. In this malady 
the muscles are usually tender to pressure, there are no pupillary 
anomahes, no sphincter defects, while there is motor weakness 
with w^asting. The history" also affords important points of 
distinction. The presence of signs of lateral column sclerosis, 
of a familial history, and the age of the subject should render 
the differentiation of Friedreich’s ataxy simple. Subacute 
combined degeneration of the spinal cord is also a malady in 
which the tendon jerks may be lost and the gait ataxic, but 
no error of diagnosis should arise, for in this disease the leg 
muscles are commonly tender to pressure, there is muscular 
weakness, usually an extensor plantar response, and all the 
signs and symptoms of pernicious anaemia. There is no loss 
of sphincter control in this disease, except possibly in its 
terminal stages. 

Course and Prognosis. — The course of the malady is 
extremely variable from case to case. In some, acute ataxy 
brings it first under notice, while in others the subjective 
symptomatology and the disability remain trifling for an 
indefinite number of years until the patient succumbs to some 
other malady. Arrest may take place at any stage, and this 
even in cases where both blood and cerebrospinal fluid changes 
would seem to foretell a rapid progress of the malady. Perhaps 
approximately 50 per cent, of all cases of tabes undergo arrest 
at some perii^ short of profound disability. Nor is an early 
onset of acute ataxy necessarily of bad ultimate prognosis, 
since with suitable re-education exercises co-ordination may 
be restored and remain normal for a period of years. It is 
probable that the shorter the inten^al between syphilitic 
infection and the development of talies, the more progressive 
and disabling the latter will be. The development of optic 



TREATMENT OF NEUROSYPHILIS 876 

atrophy almost always means that the subject will become 
blind within five years. 

This extreme variabihty of progress and the frequency of 
arrest should lead to considerable caution in assessing the value 
of treatment in any given case, and much sanguine opinion in 
favour of this or that remedy is based upon disregard of the 
natural variability of the disease. 


TREATMENT OF NEUROSYPHILIS 

The course of treatment necessary for a given case of 
neurosyphilis cannot always be decided upon those general 
grounds which determine the treatment of syphilis elsewhere 
in the body, even though the essential lesion be admittedly 
the same in each case. Two special considerations govern the 
position of neurosjq)hilis in this respect. In the first place, 
mercury anrl bismutli are proba])ly the most potent available 
antisj^philitic remedies for s\q>hilis of the nereous system, and 
may safely be administered when the use of the salvarsan 
compounds is unsafe. Secondly, from the irreparable nature 
of lesions of the parenchymatous elements of the nervous 
system when they have progressed beyond a certain point, 
residual symptoms tend to persist long after the causative 
syphilitic process has finally burnt itself out. The presence of 
organic symptoms does not, therefore, necessarily mean that 
active syphilis is present. It may also be pointed out that 
the Wassermann reaction does not distinguish between a 
reaction of the organism to active syphilis and the results of 
such reaction to a syphilitic process long since dead. For 
these reasons clinical criteria must often take precedence over 
serological ones in deciding on the treatment of a given case. 
Too exclusive preoccupation with the latter not infrequently 
leads to a course of repeated blood and cerebrospinal fluid 
examinations and to a rigour of treatment that are unnecessary 
and futile, and serve but to engender in the patient a s\q)hilo- 
phobia that is far more distressing p malady than syphilis. 
Therefore, bearing in mind that there is no certain cure of 
syphilis, treatment must steer a reasonable course between an 
excess that may make the ])atient's life wretched and the other 
extreme of turning the patient finally adrift without counsel 
after a single course of treatment. 

Cerebrospinal Syphilis. — On the development of signs of 
meningo-vascular lesions, active antisypliilitic measures are 
indicated. Mercury and potassium iodide are the drugs with 



876 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


which treatment is begun, and after a week or two of these 
a course of injections of one of the salvarsan compounds 
may be given. In very acute cases of cerebral syphilis it is 
definitel}' dangerous to use the latter until the patient is under 
tlie influence of mercury and iodide, and the neglect of this 
precaution may lead to an intense exacerbation of the syphilitic 
process with serious results. 

If mercury is used, the method of clioice, now rarely 
employed, is inunction. The patient is instructed to use a 
drachm of mercury ointment, or of oleate of mercury, daily, 
and to rub it in with the palm of his hand for from fifteen to 
twenty minutes. The limb flexures are avoided, and a different 
place is chosen daily. A sulphur bath once a week and the use 
of a mouth wash containing aluminium aceto-tartrat^ (2 per 
cent, solution) are desirable. A total of from fifty to sixty 
inunctions may be given in this way, and if the patient be 
unable to inunct liimself, a nurse using a rubber glove 
may do it* for him. When for any reason inunction is im- 
practicable, mercurial injections (1 gr. of mercury in sterile 
emulsion) into the muscles should Ik* given weekly. Potassium 
iodide is given in 20-gr. doses three times daily. Neosalvarsan 
may be given in weekly intravenous injections, beginning with 
0-3 or 0-46 grin, and working u]), if the drug l)e veil tolerated, 
to a sixth dose of 0*6 grin. 

The repetition of this combined course of treatment will 
depend upon both clinical and serological criteria, but repeti- 
tion at least once a year for several years will probably be 
necessary. For further details of the treatment of syphilis 
with arsenical and bismuth compounds the reader is referred 
to page Ifio. 

Tabes Dorsalis. — Although the contrary is widely believed 
and stated, there is no convincing evidence that antisyphihtic 
remedies exert any influence upon the course of tabes dorsalis. 
In many instances the malady advances ruthlessly despite pro- 
longed and intensive treatment on these lines, while in many 
others it becomes arrested in the absence of such treatment. 

But if it be deemed expedient to give remedies of this order, 
bismuth is probably the dnig of choice, and in this case the 
duration and repetition of coursers of treatment are better 
dictated by clinical than by serological standards. I'hc per- 
sistence of lightning pains may be taken as an indication of 
an active ta}>e.s. 

Special symptoms which call for treatment are : — 

(a) Ataxy , — The most striking results are obtained in very 
many cases by re-educative exercises. In severe ataxia these 



TREATMENT OF NEUROSYPHILIS 


877 


may be begun in bed, the patient carrying out simple graded 
movements on the lines described by Fraenkel. Later, carefully 
graded walking exercises are given on a floor or strip of canvas 
on which lines or footprints are painted. These exercises 
demand the full attention of the patient, and at the beginning 
some skilled instruction. The improvement sometimes reaches 
restoration of normal co-ordination, which may be maintained 
for a period of years. In this connection may be mentioned 
the great importance of keeping tabetics on their feet and 
the danger of confining them to bed unless it be imperative. 
Many a tabetic has entered an institution for treatment, and 
after two or three weeks in bed, finds on arising that he has 
become profoundly ataxic. 

(6) Pain . — The lightning pains may be controlled or 
relieved in most instances by aspirin, phenacetin, tincture of 
gelsemium, and other analgesic drugs. Morphia is strongly 
contraindicated unless its use is imperative as a temporary 
measure. 

(c) Gastric Crises . — These are often very resistant to 
palliative treatment. Tincture of iodine in 2-minim doses 
in water, dilute hydrocyanic acid 5 minims in 2 drachms 
of water, or chloretone (three or four lO-gr. doses, at six or 
eight hourly intervals) may give relief. Here also morphia 
should be avoided, if possible, on account of the liability to 
addiction. 

(d) Disturbances of Micturition . — Since there is commonly 
residual urine in all cases presenting these symptoms, infection 
is a complication which arises sooner or later in most cases, 
and may require the usual treatment of cystitis. Urinary 
disinfectants and bladder irrigation may be necessary. The 
presence of cystitis undoubtedly aggravates the pains and 
other disabilities of tabes, and much rehef may be obtained 
by careful attention to the condition of the bladder in this 
respect. 

The avoidance of alcohol and of excess in food or tobacco 
is important, and if observed may serve to relieve many of the 
symptoms mentioned above. A regular action of both bowel 
and bladder is imix)rtant. The ])atient should be urged to 
take exercise within the limits of fatigue when possible. The 
presence of i)erf orating ulcer or of joint lesions calls for 
the rest of the affected part, and in tlie latter case splinting 
may be necessary. The majority of tabetic patients are 
thin and cachectic and their adequate nourishment calls for 
attention. 

General Paralysis. — It is probable that, like tabes, this 



878 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


malady is wholly uninfluenced by any form of antisyphilitic 
treatment, but since cerebral syphilis may at times closely 
resemble it, this mode of treatment should be adopted if there 
is the least doubt as to diagnosis. However, once a diagnosis 
of general paralysis is satisfactorily established, it is wisest to 
consider what is so far the most efficacious non-specific mode 
of treatment yet available, namely, pyrexial therapy. This 
may be achieved either by infecting the patient with benign 
tertian malaria and allowing him to have up to twelve rigors 
before exhibiting quinine, or by placing him in an apparatus 
in which he is electrically heated until a temperature of 104^^ 
and upwards is reached, and maintained for the requisite 
period on a number of occasions. Both these methods are not 
free from danger and should be undertaken only by those 
skilled in their use and mider ideal conditions. It is not 
therefore necessary to describe either method in detail here. 
Seeing that general paralysis when untreated is always a fatal 
malad}^ the risks involved in these procedures are well justified 
in early cases where no marked physical disability or profomid 
dementia is present. Following recovery from the immediate 
effects of pyrexial therapy, a course of tryparsamide injections 
is begun. 

It is probable that the treatment acts by the destruction 
of spirochaetes by the pyrexia. Parenchymatous changes in 
the brain cannot, of course, be remedied by this means, and the 
method is most valuable in early cases. 

Remarkable and long-standing remissions sometimes follow 
malarial infection, but a genuine restoration to normal is rare, 
and usually a mild degree of fatuity characterises the patients 
so treated. 

It is generally advisable to conduct the treatment in an 
institution where any exacerbation of mental disorder can be 
dealt with adequately. 


EPILEPSY 

Epilepsy is a chronic malady characterised by the recurrence 
of sudden brief disturbances of cerebral function, of which the 
essential feature is a partial or complete loss of consciousness. 
To this, in many instances, may be added convulsive movements 
of varying severity and extent. Momentary attacks with 
minimal or no convulsive phenomena are spoken of as 'peiii mal 
or minor epilepsy, and more severe attacks with generalised 
convulsions as grand mal or major epilepsy. 



EPILEPSY 


879 


iEtiology. — Nothing is known of the causation of epilepsy 
nor of the essential pathological process in the brain underlying 
the production of the fits. The fit has no known morbid 
anatomy, and no constant abnormahty of metabohsm or of 
endocrine function has been found in association with it. On 
the cerebral process which accompanies the fit some light has 
recently been thrown by the study of the action currents 
(Berger rhythm, cortical potentials) produced by the nerve 
cells of the cerebral cortex. By the use of electrodes attached 
to the scalp and a suitable amplifier, these potentials can be 
recorded as a wave-like record on paper, somewhat in the 
manner that the electro -cardiograph records the electrical 
variations in heart muscle. The pattern of the w aves is altered 
by cerebral activit 3 % and the rh^^thm is best seen when the 
subject sits at ease w ith his eyes closed. In this wa^^ the normal 
range of variations in the record have been established. It is 
found that during the course of an epileptic seizure, and in 
epileptic subjects even when no clinically’ visible fit is present, 
the pattern is changed in one of three ways. In major fits a 
fast high-voltage rhydhm is seen, in minor fits an alternation 
of high slow weaves and spike-like weaves, wdiile in the rarer 
psychomotor fits another characteristic wave pattern is seen. 

While the study of the electro-encephalogram (E.E.G.), as 
the record is called, may provide confirmatory or excluding 
evidence of value in doubtful cases of minor epilepsy^ it sho\ild 
be r(uiu*nibered tiiat the records call for skilled interpretation, 
and that wave j)atterns like those of e})ileps 3 ’ are to be found 
in some 10 ]H‘r cent, of the population : that is. in many 
persons who are not subject to epil(‘]).s 3 \ epileptics forming 
but O-T) ])er cent, of tlie })oj)ulation. Further, it has recently 
been estimaUnl that in 40 per cent, of clinicalK^ diagnosed cases 
of ef)ileJ)s 3 ^ the E.E.tJ. provides no conlirmatorv infmanation, 
while, finally, abnormalities of rhvthm are to be found in 
various organic diseases of the brain. A diagnosis of epilepsy 
cannot made on the E.E.G. alone in the absence of 
clinical evidence. Even great^er reserve should be observed, at 
I)resent, in accepting electro-cncephalographic evidence as to 
the presence or localisation of an intracranial new giowth 
(see p. 779). 

As to the ))h 3 \siological significance of these elect vo-encephalo- 
graphic findings in the case of (‘])ile]>sy, we can sav no more at 
present than that thej" accoin])anv fits. That they stand in a 
causal relation to them is not yet establishcHi. 

Since fits clinically indistinguishable from those of epilepsy, 
as we have defined it above, may occur as symptoms in other 



880 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


itialadies, it has been suggested that epilepsy is not a distinct 
disease but a group of ^ed symptom-complexes expressive 
of diverse pathological processes to which the term “ the 
epilepsies ” might more accurately be applied. 

Nevertheless, no malady has a more striking and clear-cut 
clinical individuality, and even though its causation be obscure, 
few are better entitled to rank as distinct diseases. 

Direct inheritance of the disease, though commonly believed 
to be frequent, is in fact exceptional. If anything be inherited 
it is no more than a cortical instability that may during life 
issue in fits, either for no discoverable cause, as in idiopathic 
epilepsy, or in the presence of such adventitious factors as new 
growth, inflammation, degeneration, or injury of the brain. 
A neuropathic inheritance is also thought to be common, and 
the occurrence of migraine, alcoholism, insanity, and so on in 
the ascendants is often cited, but these are vague considera- 
tions, and there is no conclusive evidence of a true inheritance 
of epilepsy obejdng any known laws of inheritance. SyphiUs 
plays no part in its production. The first and second deca^les 
of life, especially the latter, are those in which it most frequently 
begins. Its onset after the third decade is relatively uncommon, 
and fits beginning later than this should give rise to the 
suspicion of focal disease. In an epileptic subject fits may 
be precipitated by various factors such as anxiety, fatigue, 
gastro-intestinal disturbances, and unhygienic conditions of 
hfe. 

Symptomatology. — In the case of a major fit the course 
of events is relatively constant. A momentary subjective 
sensory disturbance (the aura) may warn the subject of the 
iin [Mending fit. He then falls unconscious, sometimes with a 
CT\’. The .skeletal mu.sculature at once goes into strong tonic 
spasm, and when this is unequal on the two sides the eyes 
and then the hea<l deviate tc» one side. Sometimes the trunk 
follows, and occasionally the patient rolls over on t<) his face, 
and may thus run the risk of suffocation if he be in ted. "I'he 
arms are commonly flexed, the legs extended. In a varying 
number of seconds the tonic spasm begins to intormit, the 
intermissions rapidly increasing in degi'ee and duration, so that 
the spasm now" becomes clonic in character. The limbs now 
are the seat of jK>W'erful jerking movements. The tongue may 
be bitten either in the tonic or the clonic stage. f>oth is 
exjxjlled from the mouth with each expiratory jerk, and is 
blood stained if the tongue or cheek has been bitten. Cyanosis, 
due to respiratory 8j)asm, passes off with the resumption of 
thoracir movement. Evacuation of bladder or rectum may 



EPILEPSY 


881 


occur. Following the spasm the patient relaxes into a state 
of flaccid coma, from which after some few minutes he awakes, 
only to fall into a deep sleep in many instances. Early in the 
fit the pupils dilate and remain dilated, and the tendon jerks 
are lost until consciousness is restored. During this time, also, 
the plantar responses are found to be of the extensor type. 
The pulse increases in force and frequency during the period 
of spasm, becoming transiently feeble as the fit terminates. 
Headache and sickness may follow the fit. 

The Aura, or warning, which precedes the fit is present in 
about three-fifths of all cases of epilepsy, and even when it 
is not entirely sensory in character has a sensory component. 
The sensory aura may consist of a vague visceral sensation 
commonly localised in the epigastrium, the so-called epigastric 
aura ; or of unilateral or bilateral parsesthesiae referred to 
the limbs, trunk, or head ; or of a special sense disturbance, 
visual, auditory, or olfactory ; or finally, it may be psychical 
in character such as a passing idea or emotion. Motor 
phenomena may accompany sensory auras, such as the move- 
ment of a limb, a rotation of the head and eyes, jerking or 
starting movements. They are invariably very brief in 
duration, and are followed instantly by loss of conscious- 
ness. Unilateral and localised warnings, sensory, or sensory 
and motor combined, and special sense warnings (lights, 
smell, or taste) are of importance as indicating the focus 
in which the discharge is beginning, and are particularly 
common in the case of fits arising from local lesions such 
as tumours. 

Sometimes warnings occur which are not followed by fits 
in the subjects of epilepsy. 

The nature and sequence of the convulsive phenomena 
have already been described. The coma which ensues after 
cessation of the convulsion may be transitory and rapidly 
recovered from, or may be prolonged and gradually pass off. 
In status epilepticus, when fits follow in rapid succession, 
convulsion may succ^eed convulsion without any intervening 
return of consciousness. 

On regaining consciousness the patient is unaware of what 
has happened, except from the circumstances in which he may 
find himself. Thus the subject of exclusively nocturnal fits 
may know of the occurrence of a fit during the night only 
by the fact that he has been incontinent, and that the bed- 
clothes are disordered. 

There is frequently an abundant secretion of urine after a 
fit, and a trace of albumin or sugar may be present. Occasionally 

56 



882 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

a slight rise of temperature may follow a fit, and in the case of 
status epilepticus, hyperpyrexia may develop. 

In the case of a minor fit the whole attack may consist 
in nothing more than a momentary blunting of consciousness, 
which is spoken of by the patient and his friends as a “ dizzy 
turn,” a “ faint,” or a “ sensation.” Those gazing at the 
subject when this occurs note a transient vacancy of expression, 
a little deviation of the eyes, possibly a slight movement of 
the hps or eyeUds or of the head. A transient flush or pallor 
may pass over the face. The patient ceases whatever he may 
be doing at the moment of onset, stops talking or moving, 
or drops something he happens to be holding in his hand. 
The attack passed off, he resumes his conversation where he 
left off. In more severe minor attacks consciousness may be 
completely lost for a moment and the patient falls down, only 
to pick himself up immediately. A definite slight convulsive 
movement of the face or of one or both arms may occur. When 
sitting at table the patient’s head maj" suddenly drop forwards 
on to the table, only to be raised again instantly. 

Even in the absence of any trace of convulsion some 
subjects of minor epilepsy pass urine involuntarily in their fits. 

The frequency of fits varies greatly from case to case. In 
minor epilepsy numerous daily attacks may occur, or, on the 
other hand, inten^als of days or even weeks may separate the 
fits. In the case of major fits, also, almost daily attacks or 
fits separated by periods of months may be the rule. In some 
epileptics major attacks occur only during sleep or at some 
other special time, as just after waking in the morning. Fits 
of both types are frequently present in the same subject, the 
appearance of major attacks temg preceded for some years by 
minor fits. In women the menstrual period is often accompanied 
by a special incidence of attacks. 

Other phenomena found in association with epilepsy are 
post-epileptic automatism, post-epileptic hysteria, and mental 
deterioration. 

In post-epileptic automatism the subject, immediately 
after the cessation of the attack, most commonly a minor fit, 
carries out some complicated act such as removing some 
particular article of clothing, undressing, wandering from the 
house, or becoming violent. In a given 8ul)ject the form of 
the automatism tends to be constant, and when he finally 
comes to normal consciousness he is com})letely unaware of 
what has passed. Since such behaviour may follow a momentary 
and unnotice<l minor fit, various social and legal comj)lication8 
may arise when the automatic behaviour assumes certain forms. 



EPILEPSY 


883 


Again, an hysterical fit or some emotional manifestation may 
follow a minor or major attack, and give rise to a diagnosis of 
hysteria in the subject of epilepsy. In all such cases a careful 
inquiry into the history and into the period immediately 
preceding the alleged hysterical phenomena may reveal the 
real nature of the situation. 

Mental deterioration sometimes develops in the subjects 
of repeated fits of either type. This is the greater when fits 
are numerous and the malady of long standing, for example, 
in subjects who have been affected since childhood, and 
particularly in the case of minor attacks of great frequency. 
In these circumstances the epileptic child may become 
intractable, spiteful, untruthful, and quarrelsome. After many 
years of major attacks a slowly progressive dementia may set 
in. It must be remembered, however, that these changes are 
not constant even in severe cases of the disease. 

Prognosis. — ^With each fit the liabihty to further attacks 
tends to increase, and the spontaneous cure of epilepsy is 
extremely rare and camiot be promised in any given case. 
There is no foimdation for the widespread belief that fits 
beginning in infancy often cease to occur after puberty, or 
that the age of twenty -one is a period when spontaneous cure 
may be looked for. Prognosis depends, therefore, upon the 
effectiveness and continuity of treatment. Marriage and preg- 
nancy have no definite influence upon the course of the disease. 
A fatal termination to a single fit is exceptional, and when it 
occurs is due to some such complication as injury, drowming, 
or asphyxia during the period of coma. In status epilepticus 
death may ensue from exhaustion, but this is uncommon. 

Diagnosis. — In idiopathic epilepsy diagnosis commonly 
depends upon an accurate history, since physical examination 
reveals no objective abnormalities due t<j the disease. It would 
be an error to suppose tliat an electro-encephalogram is necessary 
to the diagnosis of epilepsy, or that this diagnosis can be made 
on the basis of this instrumental procedure in the absence of 
adequate clinical e\adence. In exceptional and obscure cases 
of suspected minor epilepsy, it may happen that the electro- 
encephalogram gives supporting evidence, but even here it is 
not yet infallible and a final balance of opinion as to its value 
has yet to be reached. Further, as has been stated earlier, 
fits indistinguishable from those of idiopathic epilepsy may 
occur as symptoms of a variety of pathological concUtions : 
intracranial tumour, general paralysis, intracranial hamiori'hage 
and thrombosis, cardiac and renal disease. 

It is especially when fits make their first appearance after 



884 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

the age of thirty years that evidence of one or other of these 
conditions should be sought for before a diagnosis of epilepsy 
is made. In all but one of them, such evidence may be found, 
but as has been emphasised on page 789, generalised fits may be 
the first indication of the growth of an intracranial tumour. 
Attacks of transient unconsciousness due to heart block 
(Stokes-Adams syndrome, vide p. 515) may sometimes be 
mistaken for epilepsy. If the patient be seen in an attack the 
extreme bradycardia will settle the diagnosis. 

In differentiating an epileptic from an hysterical fit it must 
be remembered that there is a constant sequence of events 
in the former, but that in the latter every patient is a law 
unto herself. The convulsive movements of epilepsy are 
clonic jerking movements ; those of hysteria are complex 
disorderly movements of infinite variety, which tend to 
increase in force and extravagance if the patient be restrained. 
Hysterical fits do not occur during sleep, in dangerous 
situations, nor except in the presence of an audience. The 
reflexes, pupillary , comeal, and tendon, are all retained during an 
hysterical fit, and tongue biting and incontinence do not occur. 

Treatment. — The maintenance of a high level of general 
health and of a healthy regime of life are essential. Pressure 
of work or, in the case of children, of education, and stress of 
any kind are unfavourable, and tend to nullify the effects of 
drug treatment. 

Many epileptics are ravenous eaters, and the taking of a 
plain diet in reasonable quantity at regular times is essential. 
In the case of children, good results are claimed for a diet so 
devised as to produce a degree of ketosis ; that is one restricted 
in carbohydrates and liberal in fats. A daily regular action of 
the bowels is of importance, and if there be difficulty m this 
respect it is best to remedy it as far as possible by diet rather 
than by the habitual use of aj)erient8. These, however, may 
be essential. An open-air life is best when practicable. Alcohol 
is contraindicated. 

The general statement may l>e made that minor epilepsy is 
more difficult to control than major. In cases that respond 
well to moderate doses of bromide, that are not of long standing 
and in which the fits are relatively infrequent, freedom from 
fits is often obtained. 

Whatever drug or combination of drugs be adopted in any 
given case, the essential condition of success is continuity of 
treatment. No drug has an influence for more than a few hours 
after administration, and the intermittent administration of 
drugs, or their omission on the specious plea that they impair 



EPILEPSY 


885 


the intellectual energy of the patient, as soon as freedom from 
fits for a few weeks or months has been achieved, are absolutely 
unjustifiable. The sudden cessation of repeated fits is some- 
times followed by a period of depression, which is apt to be 
attributed to the drug used. When depression can reasonably 
be ascribed to this cause, the proper remedy is not the abandon- 
ment of treatment but a change of the drug. The successful 
treatment of any given case is a matter of trial and error, 
and many changes may be necessary before the best possible 
results are obtained. 

Of the various drugs of value those longest in use are the 
bromides of sodium or potassium. The dose used and the time 
of administration vary with each case. In nocturnal epilepsy 
a single daily dose of from 10 to 30 gr. may be given at bed- 
time. In other cases two or three daily doses may be given. 
The addition of liquor arsenicalis (2 to 3 minims) to each dose of 
bromide will le^en the liability to bromide eruption. Another 
valuable adjuvant is tincture of belladonna (10 minims). It 
is well borne by children, and sometimes the dose may be 
increased to 15 minims with excellent results. Tincture of 
digitalis (5 minims to each dose) has also been used in 
combination with bromide. 

Borax and potassium borotartrate (10 gr. to the dose) have 
also been advocated in cases where bromide is ill- tolerated, 
but their use has not given very striking results. 

Of recent years luminal (phenobarbitone) has been exten- 
sively used. Luminal may usefully be combined with moderate 
doses of bromide and belladonna. In this w ay smaller doses 
of each may be used than would otherwise be possible. Not 
more than half a grain of luminal should be given in a single 
dose until the patient’s tolerance is ascertained. The common 
signs of intolerance are dizziness, drowsiness, and the appearance 
of erythematous rashes. Recently a substance know n as sodium 
diphenyl hydantoinate (Epanutin, Solantoin) has been intro- 
duced, and in some cases it has proved more effective than the 
remedies already available. The dose is 1*5 gr. three or four 
times daily for an adult and half that dose for a child. When 
used to replace phenobarbitone the change-over should be 
made gradually over a period of tw o weeks. No final judgment 
is yet possible as to the usefulness of Epanutin, and at present 
it is best used in those cases which have not responded satis- 
factorily to better-known remedies. In a few patients toxic 
symptoms follow its administration. These include nausea, 
tremor, dizziness, and even diplopia, while in severe cases of 
intolerance a purpuric dermatitis may ensue. Prolonged 



886 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


administration is not rarely followed by a liigh degree of 
hyperplasia of the gums. 

When fits are Imown to occur at certain special periods, as 
before menstruation, the use of an aperient and an increase of 
the dose of drug used may fend off attacks. 

During the course of a major fit, the handle of a spoon or 
tooth brush introduced between the teeth may prevent tongue 
biting. The patient is best kept flat on his back, with collar 
loosened. To arrest the course of status epilepticus, hyoscine 
hydrobromide to gr.) or morphine (i to ^ gr.) may be 
given hypodermically, or paraJdehyde (4 drachms) per rectum. 

In an ordinary case of epilepsy it is never safe to dis- 
continue the use of drugs until there has been no fit for three 
year^, although after the second year the dosage may be pro- 
gressively diminished. It is sometimes taught that epilepsy 
is largely, if not wholly, a psychogenic disturbance most 
rationally and effectively treated by psychological means. 
This view is speculative and unsound, and while psychotherapy 
may be of value in remedjdng any maladaptation to his environ- 
ment which the patient may show, it can never be more than 
an adjuvant to continuous drug m^ication. Experience shows 
that few common maladies are less efficiently treated, in general, 
than epilepsy. Despite the ad\ice, reiterated in every textbook, 
that there is no short cure and that long-continued medication 
is essential, it is distressingly common to encounter patients 
who have never been made aware of this necessity by their 
medical advisers, and indeed have been encouraged by them 
to abandon treatment witliin a few months of the cessation of 
fits. No one can foretell of any patient that medication will 
render him free from liability to recurrent fits, but not a few 
are made free when treatment is kept up without interruption 
for an adequate period. On the other hand, it may confidently 
be stated that short-term or irregular medication will never lead 
to a permanent cessation of fits. The carelessness of patients, 
their parents and relatives is often responsible for ineffective 
medication, but it cannot be denied that erronef)UH views on 
tliis matter held by their medical a^lvisers are scarcely less 
frequently to blame. 


PYKNOLEPSY AND NARCOLEPSY 

Pyknolepsy. — This name haa been given to a condition 
occurring in children between the ages of four and twelve, in 
which slight attacks indistinguishable from those of minor 



MIGRAINE (PAROXYSMAL HEADACHE) 887 

epilepsy occur with extreme frequency (up to 50 daily). No 
mental deterioration ensues and the attacks cease spontaneously 
and finally at about the age of puberty. A confident diagnosis 
of pyknolepsy cannot be made until this natural cure has 
occurred, an indication of the uncertain basis upon which 
this supposed clinical entity rests. It does not respond to any 
treatment. 

Narcolepsy. — ^A rare condition in which the patient is 
periodically overcome by an irresistible desire for sleep. He 
can be aroused, but if left undisturbed may slumber for as 
long as half an hour, awaking to normal consciousness. Such 
accesses of somnolence may occur several times daily. 
Associated with these is a phenomenon of another order. 
Whenever the patient feels the impulse either to laughter or 
to anger, a sudden weakness overcomes him and he sinks 
helpless to the ground, retaining full consciousness and recover- 
ing in a few seconds. This is ^own as cataplex3\ 

The causation of the condition is unknown, and the patient 
is otherwise healthy. 

A few cases of narcolepsy are found to respond favourably 
to ephedrine sulphate in ^-gr. doses twice or thrice daily, but 
really remarkable results have been obtained by the adminis- 
tration of benzedrine sulphate (benzylmethylcarbinamine sul- 
phate) in doses of from 10 to 30 mg. twice daily, preferably 
on rising and at midday. The larger dose should be used with 
caution, symptoms of overdosage being excitability, dilated 
pupils, and inability to relax. 


MIGRAINE (PAROXYSMAL HEADACHE) 

A paroxysmal nerv^ous disturbance of which the most 
constant feature is headache. This may be the sole feature, 
but in the fully developed attack visual and other sensory 
phenomena may be present, and also nausea with or without 
vomiting. This association of gastric symptoms leads to the 
names sick headache ” and “ bilious headache,’' by which 
the affection is widely known, 

Aitiology. — The affection commonly begins in childhood or 
adolescence, and the subject remains liable to attacks until 
past middle age. Females are more frequently affected than 
males. Direct inheritance can be traced in most cases, and 
evidence of a neuropathic heredity is not imcommon. Of 
predisposing factors, errors of refraction are regarded by some 
as of primary importance, but they are not constantly present, 



888 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

and when present their correction does not invariably give 
rehef. Other factors of this order are fatigue, worry, and 
gastro-intestinal disturbances. 

Symptomatology. — On the day preceding an attack, the 
patient may suffer from a vague malaise which warns him to 
expect it. When, as is frequently the case, the attack consists 
of headache alone, the subject awakes in the morning with 
unilateral headache, commonly temporal. This waxes in 
intensity and becomes severe, being aggravated by movement, 
strong light, and noise. It is least intense in the recumbent 
posture. It is boring and throbbing in character and may 
become bilateral when at its maximum. There is seldom any 
superficial tenderness, but eye movements, especially lateral 
deviation, or pressure on the globes may be slightly painful. 
Nausea frequently follows^ the onset of the headache. If the 
subject is able to keep completely at rest, the headache may 
pass off in an hour or two, but otherwise it usually persists 
all day. 

In a fully developed attack other and more striking 
symptoms are added to these, and the characteristic sequence 
of events is as follows : The patient is suddenly conscious of 
a bright illuminated and shimmering spot on one side of the 
field of vision. This tends to enlarge and to open out into a 
curved zigzag figure, the so-called “ fortification spectrum.” 
This figure flickers before him, and may be accompanied by 
a blotting out of part of the field of vision, which sometimes 
amounts to a hemianopia. Occasionally the visual defect 
exists without the figure. Accompanying these phenomena 
some patients may ex j>eriencc a tingling sensation in the tongue, 
which may also extend to the lips and fingers. In some cases 
a transient disturbance of speech of true aphasic character 
may occur. This group of symptoms endures for from ten 
to twenty minutes, then ceases, and is at once replaced by 
unilateral headache of the type already described, by nausea 
and frequently by vomiting. The vomiting may herald the 
end of the attack, which may be followed by a copious secretion 
of urine. 

Sometimes the sensory phenomena of migraine occur 
without being followed by hea^che. 

The pajx)xy8mB occur at varying intervals, from once or 
twice a week in severe cases to attacks every few months. 

Diagnosis* — The definite paroxysmal course, the sensory 
accompaniments, the unilateral character of the headache, 
and the absence of objective signs of disease serve to differ- 
entiate migraine from other forms of headache. 



AFFECTIONS OF THE CRANIAL NERVES 889 


In those cases with marked sensory symptoms a diagnosis 
of minor epilepsy is sometimes made. In minor epilepsy, with 
visual and other forms of sensory aura, the duration of the 
aura is momentary, lasting a few seconds. In migraine the 
sensory symptoms last for as long as twenty minutes and are 
immediately followed by the characteristic headache and 
nausea. In epilepsy, also, a definite fortification spectrum is 
not present. 

Treatment. — The avoidance of precipitating factors must be 
attempted, be these fatigue, dietary indiscretion, or any local 
disturbance of health. Any error of refraction that may be 
present should be corrected. Drug treatment consists in the 
continued administration of drugs to prevent the occurrence 
of attacks and the relief of the attack when it has appeared. 
For the former purpose the continuous use of bromide with 
nitro-glycerine is generally of definite value, and the following 
prescription has the sanction of long and successful use : sodii 
bromid., gr. x ; liq. trinitrin, V[[i ; liq. strych., IH^iv ; acid 
hydrobrom. dil., n\x ; tr. gelsem., n\x (aquam., ad t.d.s. 
Ergotamine tartrate may avert an impending or cut short a 
developing attack. It may be given hypodermically (0*5 c.c. 
of a 0*5 per cent, solution) or by mouth to gr.)- If is not 
suitable for regular medication and makes some subjects very 
sick. Luminal in small (J to | gr. t.i.d.) doses has also been 
recommended. When the attack has developed, rest in the 
dark, and the administration of such a powder as the following 
may be of use : aspirin, gr. v ; phenacetin, gr. v. ; caffeine, 
gr. i. Occasionally alcohol or even food may have a beneficial 
effect in cutting an attack short. 


AFFECTIONS OF THE CRANIAL NERVES 

Lesions of the cranial nerves or of their immediate central 
connections occur in association with various more extensive 
diseases of the nervous system. In this chapter we shall deal 
briefly with the signs of involvement of the different cranial 
nerves, and also with certain symptom-cornplexes wholly or in 
large degree expressed by disordered function of these nerves. 

The Olfactory Nbrve 

This nerve subserves the sense of smell, which includes the 
appreciation of both odours and flavours. The true gustatory 
apparatus deals only with sensations of sweetness, sourness. 



890 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


and bitterness, which make up but a part of the full range of 
what is commonly regarded as “ taste.” It is frequently by 
his diminished appreciation of the savom of his food that the 
subject of anosmia becomes aware of his disability. Lesions 
of the cerebral olfactory centres in the temporo-sphenoidal lobe 
do not produce anosmia, but subjective sensations of smell 
may be a feature of Jacksonian fits arising here. 

Bilateral anosmia may arise from local disease in the nose 
and its presence, therefore, has not necessarily any value in 
neurological diagnosis. Both bilateral and unilateral anosmia 
may result from the pressure of frontal lobe tumours upon the 
olfactory bulbs, while anosmia is a common, and sometimes 
the only permanent, objective sign of fracture of the base of 
the skidl, an injury in which the olfactory filaments may be 
tom from the bulb. 


The Optic Nerve 

Anatomy. — After leaving the orbit the optic nerve meets 
its fellow at the optic chiasma, where a partial decussation 
takes place. The fibres from the nasal halves of the retin» 
decussate, but those from the temporal halves enter the optic 
tract of the same side uncrossed. The optic tracts pass back- 
wards from the optic chiasma round the mid-brain and each 
contains fibres from the temporal half of the homolateral 
retina and from the nasal half of the other retina. Owing to 
this semi-decussation lesions of the chiasma abolish the fimctions 
of the nasal half of each retina and thus produce bitemporal 
hemianopia. Lesions of one optic tract, on the other hand, 
produce homonymous hemianopia : blindness of the nasal field 
on the side of the lesion and of the temporal field on the opposite 
side. Each optic tract passes backwards and, bending round the 
lateral aspect of the mid-brain, reaches the lateral geniculate 
body where the majority of its fibres end. The optic radiations 
arise in the geniculate body, which is the primary optic centre, 
and pass to the visual cortex. Other fibres in the optic tracts 
pass to the superior quadrigeminal bodies. These fibres are 
not visual in function, but are concerned in reflex pupillary 
reactions to light and to accommodation. Owing to the 
involvement of these fibres in optic tract and nerve lesions 
the visual disturbance may be associated with alteration of the 
pupillary reactions. Thus blindness due to a complete lesion 
of the optic nerve is associated with a large immobile pupil, 
while in optic tract lesions the illumination of the bUnd field 
of the retina does not provoke a light reaction (Wernicke’s 
hemianopic pupil reaction). 




LVF R.y.p 


Fkj. 20 


THE VISUAL PATHWAYS 


The coure© of the visual fibres from the right homonymous halves of the two retin® 
to tho right occipital pole i« reprtrsonted, Tlie termination of the right optic tract 
in the external geniculate body can I® seen and also the course of the optic radia- 
tion to tho area striata surrounding the calcarine fissure. The relation of the 
radiation to the descending horn of the lateral ventricle in the temporo-sphenoidal 
lobe is indicated, the most anterior part of the ra<!iatton Wing the so-called temporal 
loop. Tlie topographical representation of the dificrent parts of the visual field in 
the area striata can W seen. On the right of this anatomical diagram are repre- 
sented the disturbances of the visual field resulting from lesions at different parts 

of the visual |>athway. 

A, A lesion of tho right optic nerve, resulting in complete blindness of the right 

eye with immobility of the pupil. 

B, A] esion of the anterior border of the ehiasma, n>sulting in bitemporal heniianopia. 

C, A lesion of tho optic tract involving loss of vision in tho right homonymous 

half-fields. 

D, A lesion in the temponi-aphenoidal loW, involving the temporal loop of the 

optic radiation and producing loss of vision in the right homonymous upper 
quadrants of the half- fields. 

£, A lesion of the optic radiation leading to a right homonymous hemianopia. 







892 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


It is interesting to note here that hemianopia or blindness, 
associated with lesions of one or both visual regions of the 
cortex respectively, is not accompanied by loss of pupillary 
light reaction, a point of some importance in the localising 
diagnosis of lesions of the visual system (vide Fig. 20). 

Many affections of the optic nerve within the eye do not 
come in question here, such as neuroretinitis or papilloedema 
from raised intracranial tension. 

The optic nerve may be damaged in fractures of the middle 
fossa of the skull which extend to the optic foramen. Sudden 
and complete blindness and subsequent primary optic atrophy 
result from such an injury. Tumours in or above the sella 
turcica may compress the nerve or chiasma, and produce the 
visual disturbances described in the chapter on “ Intracranial 
Tumours.” The visible result of this compression is primary 
optic atrophy. Tumours of the temporo-sphenoidal lobe may 
press mesially uiK)n the optic tract and produce the visual and 
pupillary symptoms described above. 

Symptoms. — The clinical manifestations of lesions of the 
optic nerve are (1) impairment or loss of vision over part or all 
of the visual field ; (2) impairment or abolition of the pupillary 
light reaction ; (3) visible changes in the appearance of the 
optic disc. 

Betrobolbar Neuritis. — Localised lesions of the optic nerve 
may arise from a variety of causes. The pathological process 
tends to arise and be most severe in the deep central part of the 
nerve, with the result that the characteristic visual disturbance 
is a central scotoma in the field of vision. There is also 
impaired mobility of the pupil on illumination. If the lesion 
be close behind the eye there may be some swelling of the disc 
amounting sometimes to a definite papilloedema. In other 
cases, no abnormality is seen in the di^ during the acute stage 
of the lesion, but at a varying period of weeks subsequently 
pallor of the disc appears and a varying degree of primary 
optic atrophy. The various causes of retrobulbar neuritis 
are (a) toxic : excessive consumption of tobacco produces a 
recoverable retrobulbar neuritis manifested by a central scotoma. 
In diabetes progressive retrobulbar neuritis may develop with 
blindness and optic atrophy. Methyl alcohol may lead to a 
rapidly developing neuritis with blindness and optic atrophy. 
(b)Lo^ septic processes in the sphenoidal sinuses and ethmoidal 
cells may rarely produce a retrobulbar neuritis. The frequency 
of this complication is probably greatly exaggerated, owing to 
the loose way in which the presence of such suppuration or 
sepsis is assumed to be present in cases of retrobulbar neuritis 



AFFECTIONS OF THE CRANIAL NERVES 893 


in otherwise healthy persons, (c) Disseminated sclerosis is the 
commonest cause of retrobulbar neuritis in otherwise healthy 
young adults, women particularly. The symptoms have been 
described in the chapter dealing with this disease {vide p. 837). 
(See also Neuromyelitis Optica, p. 841.) 


The Ooulomotob Nerves : Third, Fourth, and Sixth 

The cells of origin of these nerves lie in the grey matter 
close to the middle line in series from before backwards, the 
third and fourth nerve nuclei in the mid-brain, and the sixth 
in the pons. The fibres of the third and sixth pass ventraUy to 
emerge on the under surface of the brain stem at the anterior and 
posterior ends of the pons respectively, while those of the fourth 
pass dorsally, decussate and emerge on the dorsal aspect of the 
brain stem posterior to the posterior corpus quadrigeminum. 

The third nerve supplies (1) the internal (medial), superior, 
and inferior recti, the inferior oblique and levator palpebrae 
superioris ; and (2) the ciliary muscle and the sphincter pupiUae. 
The fourth nerve supplies the superior oblique muscle. The 
sixth nerve supplies the external (lateral) rectus muscle. 

General Symptoms of Ocular Paralysis. — Loss of power in 
ocular muscles produces limitation of movement of the eyes, 
non-correspondence of the visual axes (t.e., squint), diplopia, 
secondary deviation of the sound eye, and erroneous projection. 
The limitation of movement is in the direction of the weak or 
paralysed muscle, and as a consequence ocular movements 
employing a paralj^wd muscle result in squint. This squint is 
due not only to failure of the affected eye to make a normal 
excursion, but also to a secondary deviation of the sound eye, 
that is, an excessive movement of the sound eye in the desired 
direction, the result of the extreme effort made to swing the 
weak eye to the required position. A further result of the 
secondary deviation of the sound eye is erroneous projection 
of the visual image. This arises as follows : The increased 
effort at innervation of the weak eye corresponds to a greater 
degree of movement than is actually taking place, and the 
image tends to be projected in space to the point at which the 
degree of effort made corresponds when ocular movement is 
normal. Thus the image is projected in the direction in which 
the eye is unable to move, and farther in that direction than 
the object actually is. Erroneous projection is always most 
pronounced when the affected eye alone is being used, and is 
not present when only the normal eye is in use. The diplopia, or 
double vision, results from the non-parallelism of the optic axes. 



894 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Lesions of the Third Nerve produce, when complete, loss of 
all ocular movement except outward movement (which is 
intact) and slight downward and inward movement. Diplopia 
is present in all movements involving the paralysed muscles. 
There is complete ptosis with an associated compensatory over- 
action of frontalis and elevation of the eyebrow, and dilatation 
with immobility of the pupil and ciliary paralysis with loss 
of accommodation. Partial lesions are common, and in these 
circumstances the various extrinsic muscles are very imequally 
aflFected, and the intrinsic muscles may escape or vice versa. 

Lesions of the Fourth Nerve are rare, apart from associated 
lesions of the third or sixth, but when isolated produce diplopia 
in all directions when the gaze is directed below the horizontal. 
The patient inclines the head downwards and towards the 
sound side. There is a very slight convergent squint. 

Lesions of the Sixth Nerve produce loss of outward move- 
ment with convergent squint and diplopia. The two images 
are parallel and uncrossed. 

Abnormalities of Pupillary Action. — The size and reactions 
of the pupil depend on the action of the circular muscle fibres 
(sphincter pupillae) which are innervated by the third nerve, 
and of the radiating fibres which are innervated by the sym- 
pathetic. The iris has three actions : (a) reflex contraction of 
the sphincter to light ; (6) reflex contraction of the dilator 
fibres on cutaneous stimulation ; and (c) contraction of the 
sphincter, in association with contraction of the ciliary muscle, 
on accommodation. 

The anomalies of pupillary reaction which may occur are ; 
(1) paralysis of accommodation : the pupil does not contract on 
accommodation ; as a result near vision is blurred. (2) Loss 
of the light reflex ; since both eyes react to illumination 
of one, each eye must be tested separately in a strong diffuse 
light. 

In third nerve lesions with associated sjTnpathetic paralysis 
the pupil is of moderate size and completely immobile. In 
isolated sympathetic paralysis the pupil is small, there is 
enophthalmos (from paralysis of orbital muscle), and narrowing 
of the palpebral fissure from paralysis of the smooth muscle 
fibres in levator palpebrsB superioris. 

Loss of the light reflex may occur as an isolated phenomenon, 
but is usually associated with myosis, irregularity, and inequality 
of the pupils. 

Tonic Pupil . — A rare condition has been described by this 
name. One or both eyes may be affected. The pupil is of 
normal size, or larger than its fellow when this is not affected. 



AFFECTIONS OF THE CRANIAL NERVES 895 


It does not respond to light, and its response on convergence 
is very slow. The patient is commonly a healthy young woman, 
but sometimes this phenomenon is accompanied by a complete 
absence of tendon jerks. Whether it occurs alone or with this 
loss of reflexes, the condition is not syphilitic in origin and is 
not related to tabes dorsalis. Occasionally, when the pupil 
affection is unilateral the patient may complain of some blurring 
of near vision. Otherwise the condition is symptomless and of 
no practical significance, but it is important not to confuse it 
with tabes dorsalis. 

Compound and Nuclear Ocular Paralyses. — Loss of con- 
vergence and of accommodation, when lateral eye movement 
is intact, is a rare result of a nuclear lesion. Loss of vertical 
movement with paralysis of the levators is a common sequel of 
mid-brain lesions involving the supranuclear mechanisms for 
ocular movement. Loss of conjugate deviation of the eyes is 
a transient result of cerebral lesions, and may also occur in 
pontine lesions. 

iEtiology of Ocular Paralyses. — Ocular paral 3 r 8 e 8 may be 
due to peripheral lesions of the oculomotor nerves, in the 
orbit or in their intracranial course, or to central lesions 
involving the nerve fibres, the nuclei, or the supranuclear 
co-ordinating centres in the mid-brain and pons. 

Peripheral Lesions may be due to injury, that is to fractures 
involving the walls of the orbit or the middle fossa of the skull, 
or sometimes to blows without fracture. The lesion is usually 
unilateral and may affect one or more of the nerves. A form of 
neuritis of the ocidomotor nerves allied to the familiar Bell’s 
palsy occasionally occurs. It may be associated with fifth 
nerve involvement. It is acute in onset, accompanied by 
severe pain in the face and in the ey^e itself, and with paralysis 
of one or more ocular muscles. Periostitis of the bones entering 
into the sphenoidal (superior orbital) fissure has been suggested 
as the cause of the condition. Within the skull a meningitic 
j)rocess is usually in question, and syphilis is by far the com- 
monest cause of paralysis of oculomotor nerves in this situation. 
Other lesions are tumours of the base of the skull, chiasmal 
tumours, carotid aneurysm (perhaps the commonest cause of 
isolated and imilateral third nerve palsy), cavernous sinus 
thrombosis, and subarachnoid haemorrhage. Occasionally, 
isolated sixth nerve jmralysis occurs in elderly subjects for no 
discoverable reason, but may poasibly be due to pressure on 
the ner\’e of a distorted atheromatous carotid artery. In 
association with acute mastoid disejise in children, the develop- 
ment of severe neuralgic pain in the side of the head and face 



896 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


may be followed by a sixth nerve paralysis with squint and 
diplopia. This is known as Gradenigo's syndrome and has 
already been referred to (p. 830). It is thought to be due to a 
localis^ meningitis at the tip of the petrous bone where fifth 
and sixth nerves lie in close proximity. Recovery is the rule, 
though surgical treatment of the mastoid disease may first be 
required. 

Central Lesions arise in a variety of conditions, including 
disseminated sclerosis, lethargic encephahtis, focal lesions of 
whatever nature in pons or mid-brain, diphtheria (accommoda- 
tion paralysis), and in the so-called ophthalmoplegic migraine. 
With lesions in this situation the paral3^se8 may be nuclear or 
supranuclear in character. Ocular paralyses of both peripheral 
and central types may be seen in tabes dorsalis, while pupillary 
abnormalities (Argyll-Robertson pupil), mj^osis, irregularity, 
and inequality may occur in all forms of neuro83rphili8. 

In rare instances a chronic nuclear ophthalmoplegia is 
associated with chronic bulbar palsy, or progressive muscular 
atrophy. 

The Trigeminal Nerve 

Anatomy. — This is the largest of the cranial nerves. It 
has motGr and sensorj^ roots, and on the latter is the Gasserian 
(trigeminal) ganglion. The larger sensory division supplies 
sensory" fibres to the anterior part of the scalp, eyes, nose, 
mouth, and parts of the ear and tongue, as well as the dura 
mater. The motor portion supplies the masticatory muscles. 
The cells of origin of the motor root lie beneath the floor of 
the fourth ventricle in the upper part of the pons. The larger 
sensory portion sends its fibres into a long column of cells, 
which extends caudallj" as far as the third cervical segment of 
the cord and lies at the tip of the posterior horn in the substantia 
gelatinosa Rolandi, and in the medulla lies in the lateral j>ortion. 
It also extends forward into the pons close to the motor nucleus. 
The motor and sensory roots leave the pons on its antero- 
lateral surface side by side in a sheath of dura mater known 
as the cavum Meckelii (cavum trigeminale), on the tip of the 
petrous portion of the temporal bone. Here the sensory root 
enters the Gasserian ganglion, from which emerge the three 
sensory divisions of the nerve : the ophthalmic, which enters 
the orbit ; the maxillary", which leaves the skull by the foramen 
rotundum ; and the mandibular, or third division, which leaves 
the skull by the foramen ovale. The ophthalmic division 
supplies sensory fibres to the eye, lacrimal gland, the meninges, 
and the skin of the anterior fiart of the scalp and of the face 



AFFECTIONS OF THE CRANIAL NERVES 897 

above the eye. The maxillary division supplies the skin of 
the face from the upper lip to the lower eyelid inclusive and 
laterally as far as the pinna, the upper jaw and teeth, and the 
lower part of the nasal cavity. 

The mandibular division supplies the side of the face, the 
pinna and external auditory meatus, the greater part of the 
tongue, the mucous membrane of the mouth, lower teeth, 
gums, and Eustachian (pharyngotympanic) tube. The motor 
root supplies the masseter, temporal, pterygoid, mylohyoid, 
digastric (anterior belly), tensor palati, and tensor t^rmpani 
muscles. 

Symptomatology. — Lesions of the fifth nerve produce 
sensory loss within the distribution of the nerve and 
paraesthesiae. In slowly progressive lesions the earliest mani- 
festation of sensory change is diminution or loss of the 
comeal reflex. Severe pain, like that of trigeminal neuralgia, 
does not accompany gross lesions of the nerve. Wasting and 
weakness of the muscles named above accompany involve- 
ment of the motor root of the nerve. In unilateral lesions 
the jaw deviates to the side of the lesion, pushed over by the 
unantagonised external (lateral) pterygoid muscles of the 
opposite side. Wasting of temporal and masseter muscles is 
visible, and on clenching the jaw weakness or paralysis of 
these muscles can be felt on palpation. 

iEtiology. — Herpes zoster of the Gasserian (trigeminal) 
ganglion may produce a herpetic eruption with intense pain 
over the ophthabnic division. Sensory loss of the cornea leads 
to intractable ulceration. In its intracranial course the nerve 
may l)e involved m any of the processes mentioned in con- 
nection with the oculomotor nerves. In tabes dorsalis an area 
of analgesia over the nose and adjacent skin is common, 
while in syringomyelia the territory of the fifth nerve may be 
affected when the spinal root of the nerve is involved in the 
lesion. 


Trigeminal Neuralgia (Tic Douloureux) 

Trigeminal neuralgia is a malady of unknown origin and 
with no discoverable lesion, of which the expression is the 
occurrence of paroxysms of intense pain m the distribution of 
one or more divisions of the fifth nerve. It is not comparable 
with any other variety of neuralgia in that, although it may 
endure for many years, no structural lesion of the fifth nerve 
ever develops and no objective clinical signs of impaired 
function in the nerve appear. 

Aitiology. — It is pre-eminently a malady of elderly persona. 



898 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

although it occurs exceptionally in young adults and sometimes 
in middle-aged persons. The two sexes are equally affected. 
Nothing is known of any causal factors. Since it may develop 
in persons who have been completely edentulous for a number 
of years, septic conditions in the mouth or tooth sockets cannot 
stand in any essential relation to it. In the subjects of the 
malady it is prone to appear especially in cold, damp weather, 
and in the presence of debilitating factors. 

Symptomatoloiry- — The symptoms tend to increase steadily 
in severity over a]]number of years. At first the periods during 
which paroxysms occur are comparatively short, amounting 
to one or two weeks, and are separated by intervals of many 
months. Later, these periods increase in length and frequency, 
and ultimately the subject may never be wholly free from pain. 
Similarly, both the distribution and severity of the pain tend 
to increase with the passage of years. Occasionally, however, 
the malady disappears after a few periods of paroxysms. 

Of the three divisions of the nerve, the second and third 
are most frequently affected. It is rare for pain to occur in 
the distribution of the first division unless it is also present 
in the other two divisions, but neuralgia confined to either of 
the two latter may occur. Not only may pain 8j)read over 
face and scalp, but it may extend dowa the side of the neck 
to the region of the shoulder and be present in the gums, 
tongue, the fauces, and ear. 

The pain may be of terrible intensity, and is described as 
being like red-hot needles,*’ “ lightning stabs,” “ shoots of 
pain,” and many other descriptive terms are used which 
indicate both the neuralgic character of the pain and its severity. 
Each paroxysm begins acutely, and consists of a rapid series 
of pains which wax to a maximum and rapidly wane. It 
may last for from ten to sixty seconds, and in severe cases 
is accompanied by free lacrimation and salivation and by 
reflex twitchings of the face. When the paroxysms are of 
great frequency, a residual aching pain may bridge the intervals 
between them, so that the f)atient is never free from pain. 
Although during the period in which they are occurring 
paroxysms may come on spontaneously, yet they are provoked 
by any movement of the face such as speaking, chewing, or 
expressional movements. Further, touching the face, or 
currents of cold air playing upon it, may start a paroxysm. 
Such patients often are compelled to abstain from shaving or 
from washing the face or teeth on the affected side for many 
days, and they remain motionless and in terror of pain for 
hours at a time. 



TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA 899 

Pressure over the branches of the nerve at their points of 
exit from the bone will provoke a paroxysm. 

Unilateral furring of the tongue is common when the third 
division of the nerve is the seat of pain. 

No objective physical signs of a lesion of the nerve are to 
be found. The comeal reflex is intact, cutaneous sensibihty is 
normal, and the motor division of the nerve is unaffected. 

Naturally, depression and debihty attend the frequent and 
persistent occurrence of paroxysms of neuralgia (see also 
Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia, p. 909). 

Diagnosis. — The appearance of the patient during a 
paroxysm, the history of the illness, and the absence of 
objective physical signs render diagnosis easy. Gross lesions 
of the fifth nerve, such as compression by a gummatous 
meningitis or by a tumour, produce objective signs of impaired 
activity : loss of the comeal reflex, sensory loss, neuroparalytic 
keratitis, and also associated signs of involvement of neighbour- 
ing nervous stmetures. They do not produce pain of any sever- 
ity, or in any way resembling that of trigeminal neural^a. 

Treatment. — When a case of the malady comes under 
observation early in its course, it is important to remember 
that the periods during which paroxysms may be expected to 
continue is short and may be followed by a long interval, 
exceeding a year, of complete freedom from pain. This should 
prevent us from taking steps of a more radical nature than the 
circumstances demand. In short, many cases of trigeminal 
neuralgia can be adequately treated over a period of several 
years by simple dmg medication, and do not require any form 
of surgical procedure, be it alcohol injection into the nerve or 
actual removal of the Gasserian ganglion and its roots. 

The drugs most valuable for the purpose are tincture of 
gelsemium, the bromides, acetyl saheyhe acid, and alhed sub- 
stances. A useful combination in cases of some severity is : 
tincture of gelsemium, n\x ; luminal-sodium, gr. ss ; sodium 
bromide, gr. xv ; phenazone, gr. v. If this or some similar 
combination does not give absolute freedom from pain, it so 
rodueeH its intensity as to allow^ of tlie proper nutrition and 
rest of the subject, both of which are essential elements in 
treatment. 

The removal of teeth is usually resorted to, but does not 
materially relievo the frequency or the intensity of the 
paroxysms. This question must be considered wholly from 
the dental point of view, and it is rarely justifiable to remove 
teeth for no other reason than the relief of pain. In long- 
standing and severe cases drugs may give no relief, and 



900 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


recourse must then be had to alcohol injection into one or 
more divisions of the nerve. This is a skilled procedure, and 
in inexperienced hands may produce serious and untoward 
effects owing to misdirection of the injecting needle and fluid. 
The method consists in the introduction of a long needle into 
the region of the foramen ovale and the injection of 80 per 
cent, alcohol (10 to 60 minims) into the ganglion or the second 
and third divisions of the nerve. A successful injection gives 
complete relief for a period up to two or more years. Final 
and absolute relief is given by ablation of the Gasserian ganglion, 
but permanent anaesthesia of cornea and face on the affected 
side results. 

Facial Hemiatrophy. — This is a rare malady characterised 
by progressive atrophy of skin, subcutaneous tissues, muscle, 
and bone within the sensory territory of the trigeminal nerve. 
There is neither paralysis nor sensory loss in the affected 
tissues. Its causation and the pathological process responsible 
for the condition are both unfaiown. It is more common in 
females than in males, and develops gradually in early adult 
life. 

The tissue atrophy may extend to the whole area innervated 
by the trigeminal nerve, or be confined to one or more divisions 
of this area. It may start in a restricted spot and spread from 
this. The skin becomes thinned and pale, the subcutaneous 
fat disappears, the muscles waste, and then the bony structures 
of the face gradually shrink, including the alveolar processes 
of the jaws. The whole affected half of the face is shrunken 
and unsightly. Diagnosis is simple. The process is not 
influenced by any known method of treatment. 

The Facial Nerve 

Anatomy. — The ceils of origin of the seventh nerve lie in 
the lateral part of the tegmentum of the pons, in relatively 
the same f> 08 ition as that of the nucleus ambiguus in the 
medulla oblongata. The nerve fibres pass dorsally and 
medially towards the floor of the fourth ventricle and bending 
round the sixth nerve nucleus turn laterally and ventrally, 
to emerge from the brain stem at the junction of pons and 
medulla. They innervate all the muscles of facial expression, 
the platysma, and stapedius. The nervus intermedins of 
Wrisberg has been described as part of the facial nerve, but 
its fibres are afferent and have entirely different connections. 
They arise in the cells of the geniculate (facial) ganglion, 
which is attached to, but not functionally connect with, 



BELL’S PALSY 


901 


the seventh nerve. The peripheral fibres of the ganglion pass 
with the seventh nerve, and then into the chorda tympani, 
with which they are distributed to the anterior two-thirds 
of the tongue, supplying this with taste fibres and end-organs. 
The central branches unite to form the nervus interm^us, 
which enters the pons ventral to the seventh nerve and, 
together with the afferent taste fibres of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve from the posterior third of the tongue, terminate in 
the nucleus of the tractus solitarius. 

Leaving the pons, the facial or seventh nerve passes laterally 
with the eighth nerve into the internal auditory meatus of the 
petrous bone, where, joined by the nervus intermedins, it 
peisses through the aqueduct of Fallopius (facial nerve canal) 
in a curved course, to emerge from the stylo-mastoid foramen. 
The chorda tympani leaves the nerve above this foramen. 
The facial nerv’^e may be involved by disease at any part of 
its course : in the pons by tumours, vascular lesions, inflam- 
matory lesions such as lethargic encephalitis or poliomyelitis ; 
in its intracranial course by tumours of the cerebeUo-pontine 
angle ; by meningitis in the petrous bone or by caries from 
middle ear disease ; at the stylo-mastoid foramen by the 
process which causes the familiar Bell’s palsy ; and in its 
peripheral course by parotid tumours or injury. The typical 
picture of facial paralysis is seen in Bell’s palsy. 

Bell’s Palsy — JEtiology , — ^Nothing is certainly known of 
the causes of this very common malady. It is on the whole 
an affection of adult life, at any period of which it may occur. 
It is said to appear in cold and inclement weather, but while 
cold and exposure must remain hypothetical causes, it may 
certainly be said that there is a periodicity in the occurrence 
of facial palsy which is most often seen in the late autumn 
and early winter, and in the out-patient practice of a neuro- 
logical hospital a small “ crop ” of cases may be expected at 
tlids time of year. Of these, some are certaidy the results of 
geniculate herpes, and the proportion of cases of Bell’s palsy 
due to this cause is not known. 

Symptomatology , — Immediately preceding the onset of the 
paralysis, it is common for the patient to complain of aching or 
of neuralgic pains in the region of the mastoid and the angle of 
the jaw, and of stiffness of the muscles of the affected side 
of the neck. This is followed by sudden and total i>araly8i8 
of the nerve. The sequence of events has led to ttie view 
that an inflammatory process has extended from these 
muscular and fascial structure to the sheath of the emerging 
nerve, whence it spreads upwards into the bony canal. Here 



902 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


swelling leads to constriction of the nerve and to paralysis. 
The muscles of the affected half of the face are paralysed and 
toneless, and in all movements that half of the face remains 
immobile. The angle of the mouth and the eyebrow droop, 
and the frontal furrows are flattened out. The lower eyelid 
sags and tears run over its edge. Attempts to close the eye 
are followed by a slight drooping of the upper lid from relaxa- 
tion of levator palpebrae superioris, but the lids are not 
approximated and remain apart even during sleep. Further, 
the globe of the eye is seen to turn up even more than is the 
case on the normal side (if the lid of this side be kept open 
by the observer when making the comparison). 

Fluids taken into the mouth trickle from the paralysed 
angle, and the patient cannot whistle or blow out his cheeks 
without allowing air to escape from this angle. The platysma 
is also paralysed. Paralysis of the buccinator allows food to 
collect between gums and cheek. If the inflammatory process 
involve the nerve between the geniculate ganglion and the 
point distally at which the peripheral fibres of this ganglion 
leave the nerve to pass into the chorda tympani, then taste 
is lost over the anterior two- thirds of the tongue. Lesions of 
the seventh nerve at other parts are not associated with loss of 
taste. Paralysis of the stapedius may be followed by increased 
auditorj" acuity and by subjective clicking noises in the ear. 

Course , — The duration varies from a week or two to several 
months. In severe lesions the faradic excitability of the nerve 
diminishes and is lost during the second week. The reaction 
of degeneration is then obtainable from the facial muscles, and 
if present it affords valuable prognostic information. If at the 
end of four weeks the muscles are inexcitable when faradic 
stimulation is used, and no visible recovery of function is 
present, long-delayed and partial recovery may be ex|>ected. 
With the return of voluntary power some contracture develops 
in all but the most rapidly recovering cases. It is most marked 
in the orbicularis palpebrarum (orbicularis oculi) and leads to 
great narrowing of the palpebral fissure, and in the zygomatic 
muscles where it leads to exaggeration of the nasolabial fold. 
There is also a tendency to associated overaction. Thus 
voluntary clo8iu*e of the eyelids is accompanied by deepening 
of the nasolabial fold, and vice versa. In cases of imperfect 
recovery this contracture tends to mask the degree of paralysis, 
but it may be so severe as almost to approximate the lids. 

Occasionally a facial palsy may Ikj bilateral, and in this 
case the second half of the face is affected a few days later 
than that first involved. In the absence of other signs such a 



BELL’S PALSY 


903 


bilateral affection does not necessarily, or even commonly, 
indicate the presence of some intrapontine lesion. Recurrence 
of facial palsy is rarely seen, but is known to occur. 

Prognosis . — The indications upon which this must be based 
are given above. Even in severe cases which show no recovery 
after several months it is never necessary to despair, since 
improvement continues well into the second year and severe 
permanent paralysis is rare. 

Treatment , — At the onset, hot applications to the region of 
the ear and the administration of salicylates are indicated. 
Later, gentle massage to the facial muscles should be continued 
until recovery is well advanced. Electrical stimulation is 
valueless and probably leads to an increased contracture. A 
sling made of a piece of silver wire may be used to prevent 
stretching of the muscles round the mouth. It is bent at 
each end, and one end passes behind the ear and the other 
is adjusted to curl round the angle of the mouth. A length 
of thin rubber tubing may be placed round the oral end of 
the wire. 

Geniculate Herpes. — The sequence of events is commonly 
as follows : there is severe neuralgic pain in the region of the 
external auditory meatus and adjacent parts of the pinna. 
There may also be pain in the fauces and in the anterior part 
of the tongue on the same side. An eruption of herpetic 
vesicles then makes its appearance in the pinna, and sometimes 
also a few’ vesicles are to be seen on the pillars of the fauces 
and on the anterior part of the tongue. In severe cases the 
pinna may swell considerably and the appearances of a “ sore 
throat ” be present. There may also be a febrile reaction and 
much malaise. When the vesicles in the ear burst there is a 
watery secretion which has been mistaken for an otorrhoea. 

Some two weeks after the onset, and while the ruptured 
vesicles are still unhealed a facial palsy develops, wdth all the 
features already described. 

Associated with the geniculate herpes, an eruption may 
also be seen in the distribution of the second cervical nerve 
(posterior part of scalp and below the jaw round towards 
the chin). 

Facial Spasm. — This is a malady of elderly persons, of 
unknown eotiology. The facial muscles go into momentary 
contraction in the form of an irregular clonic spasm. There 
may be a slight degree of maintained tonic spasm underlying 
this. It is always increased by emotion or by voluntary facial 
movements. As a rule it jiersists indefinitely and responds 
badly to all forms of treatment. In the most severe cases 



904 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

alleviation has been given by alcohol injections into the 
facial nerve, thus replacing spasm by paralysis which may 
be temporary, or more or less permanent. Clonic facial spasm 
may also be produced by compressing lesions of the nerve, or 
occur as part or all of a Jacksonian fit. 

The Eighth Nerve 

This nerve comprises sensory and non-sensory components. 
The sensory component is the cochlear nerve which subserves 
the auditory function. The non-sensory component is the 
vestibular nerve which subserves various reflex reactions 
concerned in the co-ordination of movement and posture. 
The two components are distinct peripherally and have 
separate central connections. 

The nerves may be involved in their central course by focal 
lesions of the brain stem, in their intracranial course by tumours 
of the cerebello-j)ontine angle, or by gummatous meningitis in 
this region. The cochlear and vestibular end-organs may be 
involved by suppurative processes in the petrous part of the 
temporal bone. 

Symptomatology ol the Cochlear Nerve. — Lesions of this 
nerve produce either deafness or tinnitus, or both combined. 
Slowly progressive pathological processes are prone to produce 
slowly developing deafness associated with tinnitus, as may 
be seen in the case of eighth nerve tumours, but these two 
symptoms are seen in a variety of conditions within the j>etrous 
bone itself in which the nervous elements are secondarily 
involved. Deafness due to a lesion of the nerve (nerve deafness) 
may be differentiated from middle ear deafness by the following 
tests : The Weber lest : the foot of a vibrating tuning fork 
is placed upon the forehead. With nerve deafness the sound 
is best heard on the normal side, while in middle ear deafness 
it is best heard on the affected side. The liinne test : normally 
a vibrating fork is best heard when held slightly away from the 
ear. If it be placed upon the mastoid until it be no longer 
heard and then approached to the meatus it is heard again. 
In short, air conduction is better than bone conduction. In 
middle ear disease this relationship is reversed, and bone 
conduction is better than air conduction. In cochlear lesions 
both air and bone conductions are proportionately reduced. 
It may be added that the accurate differentiation of nerve 
from middle ear deafness may he a matter of considerable 
difficulty even in experienced hands. 

, Tinnitiis is an extremely common symptom and may be 



AFFECTIONS OF THE EIGHTH NERVE 905 


due to local lesions in the external auditory meatus, in the 
middle ear, in the cochlear apparatus, or in the cochlear nerve 
within the skull. Occurring as an independent symptom it is 
commonly due to disease of the cochlea, when it is associated 
with slowly progressive deafness. It may occur in elderly 
subjects presenting signs of arterial degeneration, and may 
prove a distressing and intractable symptom. The noises are 
described as whistling, roaring, buzzing noises, or as like the 
Boimd of rushing or falling water. 

Diagnosis. — The recognition of tinnitus presents no diffi- 
cult3% and its cause must be determined by a systematic 
examination of the nervous system generally and of the 
auditor}' apparatus. When due to intracranial lesions, diagnosis 
depends upon associated signs of nervous involvement. 

Treatment . — Occurring as an independent symptom it is 
generally intractable, but its intensity may be relieved by 
the administration of potassium iodide, the bromides, hydro- 
bromic acid, or luminal. 

Symptomatology of the Vestibular Nerve. — The lab}Tinth 
has tw'o components, the semicircular canals and the otolith 
organs (utricle and saccule). The former are stimulated by 
movement, the latter by changes in the position of the head. 
The symptomatology of labyrinthine disease has not been fully 
elucidated in man, and the majority of symptoms attribut- 
able to this organ arise from disease of the semicircular 
canals. Vertigo is the most striking and best recognised 
symptom. 

Vertigo. — True vertigo is a subjective sense of rotation, 
either of self or of surrounding objects. In intense vertigo 
consciousness may be disturbed or lost. 

Vertigo may occur as a symptom in cerebellar disease, in 
lesions of the vestibular nerve and of the labyrinth, and also 
in cardio-vascular disease, and in association with nausea and 
vomiting. In all these conditions the symptoms and signs of 
the underlying condition are to be found. Almost all cases of 
vertigo occurring in the absence of signr of disease elsewhere 
are due to chronic degenerative changes in nerve endings in 
the labyrinth. The functions of the semicircular canals may 
be investigated by studying the nystagmus resulting from 
rotation of the patient, or from irrigation of the external 
auditory meatus with hot and cold water. These tests are 
highly complicated and require skilled employment. 

Mknikhk\s Syndrome — Mtiology . — ^Tliis is a malady of 
adults, usually making its appearance in middle life, with a 
slight preponderance of male subjects. It is not associated 



906 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


with suppurative processes in the ear, nor with oro -nasal 
sepsis. The essential lesion appears to be a specific form 
of degeneration of the labyrinth characterised by distension 
of the endolymph system. There is also some measure of 
cochlear involvement, and although the associated deafness 
and tinnitus may seem be restricted to one ear, there is 
usually a slight affection of the opposite ear. 

Symptonuitology . — The malady is characterised by sudden 
accesses of intense vertigo, with slighter interparoxysmal 
vertigo. These attacks occur at varying intervals of a few 
days or of a few weeks. They may be precipitated by sudden 
movements, by sneezing or blowing the nose, and there are 
reasons for supposing that reflexes arising in the nose may 
precipitate an attack. The sense of rotation may be purely 
subjective, or there may be an actual tendency to turn before 
falling. The subjective symptom may be of rotation of self 
or of surrounding objects, or of both. So intense is the 
giddiness that the subject usually falls down, sometimes with 
alarming suddenness. Consciousness may be momentarily 
lost. If the vertigo persist there is nausea and vomiting, the 
patient is pale and perspires profusely. The attack tends to 
pass off graduaUy, the symptoms being aggravated by any 
movement of the patient’s head. Nystagmus and, ra^el 3 ^ 
diplopia may occur during the height of the attack. Associated 
inner ear deafness and tinnitus are prescmt in many cases, 
if not at the onset of the malady then later during its 
course. 

Course and Prognosis . — In most cases the early attacks are 
the most severe, and the disease tends slowly to improvement. 
In other cases there is progressive deafness, and when this is 
complete in the affected ear the vertiginous attacks cease. 
Under treatment some degree of alleviation occurs in most 
cases. 

Diagnosis . — The occurrence of acute attacks of intense 
vertigo, especially when there are associated slight unilateral 
deafness with tiimitus and no signs of organic nervous disease, 
is characteristic of Meniere’s syndrome. In epilepsy, persistent 
deafness and tinnitus are ab^nt, while in a[)oplectic seizures 
some objective signs of nervous lesion will 1x3 found, and 
vertigo is absent or transient and slight. 

Treatment . — Phenobarbitone gr. t.d.s.) and bromides 

usually have some l>enefi<’ial effect in rc^liicing the frequency 
and severity of attacks, but rarely give cfimplete relief. Uni- 
Iat(3ral labyrintbectomy in st^vere and intractable cases, or 
incision of ilie saccus endolyrnjihaticus, is more (dfective. 



AFFECTIONS OF THE VAGUS NERVE 


907 


The Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Nebves 

These nerves are so intimately related in their central 
connections, and are so frequently affected simultaneously in 
their contiguous peripheral course, that they are best con- 
sidered together as the glosso-phar3nQgeal-vagus-accessorius 
complex. They contain both motor and sensory fibres. The 
motor fibres fall into two groups : (i) a somato-motor group 
which innervates the musculature of the pharynx, larynx, 
palate, stemomastoid, and trapezius. The cells of origin lie 
in the nucleus ambiguus and its caudal extension. The latter 
reaches as far as the third cervical segment, where it forms the 
spinal nucleus of the accessory nerve. The musculature 
is represented in this columnar nuclear mass from before 
backwards in the order named above ; (ii) a viscero-motor group 
which supplies the involuntary musculature of the alimentary 
tract and of the air passages, and which arises in the dorsal 
nucleus of the vagus. The sensory fibres also fall into two 
groups : a somatosensory group, the fibres of which end 
centrally in the substantia gelatinosa Rolandi and peripherally 
supply common sensation to the ear, mouth, pharynx, and 
the upper part of the respiratory tract ; and a larger viscero- 
sensory group which receives afferent fibres from the thoracic 
and abdominal viscera. 

The three nerve trunks leave the skull together by the 
jugular foramen. The glosso-pharjmgeal nerve ends in the 
posterior third of the tongue, the vagus extends downwards 
through the neck and thorax to the abdomen, while the spinal 
accessory (bulbar and spinal portions) sends its bulbar fibres 
to join the vagus, and its spinal fibres pass to the stemomastoid 
and trai>ezius muscles. These three nerves may be involved 
in focal medullary lesions and by lesions at the base of the 
skull or in the neck. Various symptom-complexes have been 
described corresjx)ndmg to lesions in these different situations. 

Lesions in the Medulla Oblongata. —These are not un- 
common, and may be the result of focal thrombosis, chronic 
bulbar palsy, or of syringomyelia with bulbar extension. The 
symptoms (syndrome of Avellis) are unilateral paralysis of the 
soft palate, pharjTigeal muscles, and larvmx with an associated 
crossed hemianaesthesia of syringomyelic type affecting pain 
and thermal sensibility. 

Paralysis of the soft palate is also a common symptom in 
dii)hthoritic paralysis, and is due to a lesion of the nucleus in 
the medulla. 



908 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


Lesions at the Base of the Skull, either of the nature of 
new growth, fractures, or gunshot wounds, often produce 
associated ninth, tenth, and eleventh nerve palsies. The follow- 
ing syndromes have been described. Schmidt's syndrome : 
unilateral paralysis of pharynx, larynx, palate, stemomastoid, 
and trapezius. Jackson's syndrome : like Schmidt’s syndrome, 
with the addition of a hypoglossal nerve palsy, but in 
incomplete forms the vocal cord may remain intact. 

Lesions in the Neck. — Tapia's syndrome occurs in injuries 
high in the neck, and consists in unilateral paralysis of tongue 
and vocal cord (vocal fold), the palate being intact. The lesion 
is below the offset of the pharyngeal branches. 

The characteristic sign of involvement of the glosso- 
pharyngeal nerve is sensory loss over the upper part of the 
pharynx, and loss of taste in the posterior third of the tongue. 

The characteristic signs of lesions of the vagus nerve are 
pharjngeal and laryngeal paralysis. In pharjngeal paralysis 
the soft palate lies low on the affected side and does not rise 
on phonation. and there is loss of the pharjngeal reflex on that 
side. Also, there is the so-called “ curtain movement ” of the 
posterior pharyngeal wall, which moves across to the normal 
side on swallovdng. Bilateral pharyngeal paralysis may occur 
in diphtheritic paralysis. 

Total unilateral laryngeal paralysis results from high level 
lesions of the vagus. The affected vocal cord (vocal fold) 
lies in the cadaveric position. There is weakening of the 
voice, but no stridor. 

Recurrent laryngeal nerve lesions, or lesions of the vagus 
below the offset of the superior laryngeal branches, produce 
paralysis of the abductor of the vocal cords. The affected 
vocal cord lies up against the median plane and does not 
move on phonation or on respiration. In bilateral abductor 
paralysis both vocal cords lie approximated in the mid -line 
and do not recede during inspiration. There is marked 
inspiratory stridor and considerable danger of asphyxiation 
{vide p. 872, tal)es dorsalis). 

Lesions of the Spinal Accessory Nerve , — The bulbar j[X)rtion 
joins the vagus at the ganglion of the trunk (inferior ganglion 
of vagus), and probably provides the majority of the motor 
fibres which reach the larynx through the vagus. It does 
not therefore need separate consideration. L^ions of the 
spinal portion produce stemomastoid and trajxjzius paralysis. 
It is paralysis of the latter which causes definite disability. 
The shoulder on the affected side cannot be raised fully. The 
scapula tends to fail away from the mid-line and to rotate so 



AFFECTIONS OF THE VAGUS NERVE 909 

that its superior angle lies higher than normal, and protrudes as 
a hump on the contour of the neck as seen from in front. There 
is also some winging of the scapula, like that seen in serratus 
palsy, but most marked when the arm is held extended forwards 
below the horizontal, whereas the winging of serratus magnus 
(s. anterior) paralysis is maximal with the arm above the 
horizontal. 

iEtiology ol Glossopharyngeal-Vagas-Accessorius Lesions. 

— In the medulla, chronic bulbar palsy, focal thrombosis, 
tumours, syringobulbia, and diphtheritic toxic lesions may all 
produce symptoms referable to one or more of these nerves. 
In their intracranial course, tumours, or syphilitic meningitis, 
may involve one or more of them. At the base of the skull, 
injuries or new growth may involve all three in the region 
of the jugular foramen, while in the neck, injuries, new 
growths, or aneurj^sms may compress them. The vagus 
may be involved in the thorax (recurrent laryngeal paralysis) 
by aneurj'sm. 

Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia , — This comparatively rare con- 
dition is in the characteristics of the pain very like trigeminal 
neuralgia. The patient complains of accesses of severe neuralgic 
pain in the region of the throat and ear. The paroxysm is 
commonly excited by the act of swallowing. The patient is 
usually a middle-aged or elderly man. 

Treatment resembles that of trigeminal neuralgia in the matter 
of medication. In severe and intractable cases division of the 
glosso-x^haryngeal nerve within the skull has been successfully 
performed. 

The Hypoglossal Nerve 

The twelfth nerve is an exclusively motor nerve which 
arises in a group of cells on the floor of the fourth ventricle 
close to the median plane. Its fibres innerv^ate the muscles 
of the tongue and some of the elevators of the hyoid bone 
(hyoglossus and genio-hyoid). 

Miiohgxj of Lesions , — The nerve nucleus may be involved 
in medullary lesions, particularly in chronic bulbar paralysis, 
syringobulbia, tumour, thrombosis, and sometimes in tabes 
dorsalis. The two nuclei Mng close together are generally 
both affected. The nerve may be affected in its intracranial 
course by syphihtic meningitis or new growth. Peripherally, 
it may be involved alone, or, as we have seen with vagus and 
accessorius, in any disease process deep in the neck. 

SympianujUology , — Lesions of the cortico-bulbar (upper 
motor) neurones at any level higher than the pons may affect 



910 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


the tongue, rendering the organ spastic and small and causing 
protrusion towards the side of the lesion. 

Nuclear or infranuclear lesions lead to unilateral paralysis, 
the organ when protruded being thrust towards the paralysed 
side by the unopposed muscles of the normal half, and to 
wasting and fibrillation. The organ on the affected side is 
shrunken and wrinkled, and is in constant fibrillation. 


COMPRESSION OF THE SPINAL CORD 

The spinal cord may be subjected to gradual compression 
or may be suddenly crushed. The symptom -complex of sudden 
and complete compression is that of anatomical transection of 
the cord, and will be described under the heading of “ Total 
Transverse Lesions of the Cord ” {vide p. 920 ). 

1. Gradual Compression, apart from injury to the spine, 
is the common form of compression, and may be due to a 
variety of causes. 

iEtioIogy. — The cord may be gradually compressed by 
disease of the vertebral column, of the meninges, or of the 
nerve roots. Further, tumours developing in the substance 
of the cord also effect compression as they increase in size. 

The form of vertebral disease responsible for most cases 
of compression paraplegia is tuberculous caries. This is 
commonly situat^ at some level between the fourth and 
tenth thoracic vertebrae, and may compress the cord in one 
of two ways. A tuberculous abscess forming in the vertebral 
body may bulge backwards into the vertebral canal on either 
side of the posterior common ligament, or tuberculous granula- 
tion tissue may invade the canal and, directly involving the 
theca, produce a localised meningitis with resulting constriction 
of the cord. It is imjKjrtant to rememl^er that cord conipn^ssion 
can occur in the absence of visible deformity (angular curvature) 
of the .spine, (/hildren and young ailults form the majority of 
patients so affected. 

Osteomyelitis and, more commonly, malignant disease of 
the vertebrae may cause cord compression. The latter is 
especially common after excision of the breast for carcinoma. 
In this case it is the lumbar cord that generally suffers and 
the clinical picture is a very characteristic one. Primary 
sarcoma and hyf^emephroma may also invade the vertebrae and 
lead to compression of the cord. Finally, erosion of the vertebral 
column by aortic aneurysm may produce a like result. 

The meningeal diseaW which may lead to cord compression 



COMPRESSION OP THE SPINAL CORD 911 


are syphilitic pachymeningitis, particularly in the cervical 
region, localised meningitis from vertebral osteomyelitis, and 
meningeal tumours. 

Similar in nature to meningeal tumours, which are mainly 
intra-thecal, are the benign fibromata which sometimes develop 
on the spinal nerve roots and lead to compression of the cord. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The cord may be compressed to a 
ribbon-like structure at the level of compression, or in the case 
of a tumour arising on a nerve root, the neoplasm may be found 
to have made for itself a pocket on one side of the cord. 
Microscopically there may be necrosis of both grey and white 
matter in the compressed segments, and at its upper and lower 
limits neuroglial reaction and phagocytic activity are seen, 
together with venous engorgement. Ascending tracts are 
found to be degenerated above and descending tracts below 
the level of the lesion. This descending degeneration, even in 
longstanding cases of compression, may be very incomplete. 

The Cerebrospinal Fluid (Froin*s Compression Syndrome ). — 
The compressing lesion may obliterate the subarachnoid space. 
When this happens the cerebrospinal fluid in the distal portion 
of the space stagnates and undergoes changes in composition 
and appearance, approximating more closely to blood plasma 
in the former respect. The total protein content may rise to 
many times its normal amount, for example, 0*5 or 1*0 per cent. 
The fluid may also assume a yellowish tinge (xanthochromia). 
If the compressing lesion be inflammatory m nature (meningitis), 
there may also be an increase in the cell content of the fluid, the 
cells present being mononuclears. In slighter degrees of 
alteration an increase in the protein content may be the only 
definite abnormality. 

Symptomatology. — There are minor variations in the clinical 
picture of spinal cord compression according to the nature of the 
compressing lesion, but in general the sequence of events is remark- 
ably constant. The symptoms are of two orders : (a) those 
arising at the level of compression, and (b) those due to inter- 
ference with the long ascending and descending tracts of the cord. 

Of the former, the symptoms due to compression of spinal 
nerve roots are of great diagnostic importance. 

At the level of the lesion, both anterior and posterior 
roots are commonly compressed. The posterior root symptoms 
are the more constant and prominent. They consist of sharp 
pains radiating along the course of the root and referred to 
its distribution. They may be periodic or almost constant. 
When thoracic roots are bilaterally affected, the pains encircle 
the trunk and are kno\^Ti as “ girdle pains.*' When a single 



912 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

root is affected on one side the pain is confined to one-half 
of the body. In the case of the roots which enter into the 
limb plexuses, the pains are referred to the corresponding hmb 
down which they spread. The pain may be accompanied by 
hypersesthesia and sensory impairment. Root pains may bo 
the first indication of disease, and may precede all objective 
signs of root or cord compression by weeks or months. 
Secondary carcinoma of the spine is frequently ushered in by 
sudden root pains on exertion, and the occurrence of sudden 
girdle or back pains in an individual known to have had 
visceral or mammary carcinoma is of sinister significance. 

In the case of fibroma on a spinal nerve root, more or less 
constant pain in a nerve root distribution may be present <or 
long periods before signs of cord compression appear. On the 
other hand, all such symptoms may be absent in a given case 
of spinal cord compression. Symptoms referable to ventral 
roots are not so common, and in the case of the roots which 
lie between the upper and lower limb plexuses may escape 
notice. In the case of the cervical and lumbo-sacral roots, 
howevei; wasting and fibrillation of corresponding limb muscles 
is not uncommon. Rarely, irregularly clonic muscular spasm 
may be present. 

The diagnostic importance of root symptoms lies in the fact 
that they give information as to the level of compression. 

The gradual compression of the cord itself leads to pro- 
gressive interference with conduction in the long spinal tracts, 
both ascending and descending. Usually motor symptoms 
appear before sensory changes, and there is often a period in 
the early evolution of a case of compression when the absence 
of sensory loss may make segmental localisation impossible. 
The motor disturbance consists in the gradual development 
of spastic weakness, with increase of tendon jerks, the 
appearance of clonus and of the extensor or Babinski type of 
plantar response. Probably the earliest objective signs are 
the extensor plantar response, increased tendon jerks, and 
weakness of dorsifiexion of foot and toes. 

As compression becomes more severe, the legs become 
progressively weaker, and the condition of paraplegia in 
extension develops. 

The extensor and plantarfiexor groups of muscles in tlie 
legs are extremely spastic and go periodicaliy into clonus, in 
which the whole limb is shaken. The voluntary power of 
flexion and dondflexion wanes far in advance of that of exten- 
sion and plantarflexion, and the patient, while still able to stand 
and walk, does so with stiffly held legs and shuffling feet. 



COMPRESSION OF THE SPINAL CORD 913 

Finally, powerful spontaneous flexor 8i)asm8 make their 
appearance, all voluntary power disappears, and the limbs come 
to lie in a position of full flexion, with the knees pressed against the 
abdominal wall. This is the condition of paraplegia in flexion. 
The knee and ankle jerks may disapj)ear, but stimulation of the 
sole produces a brisk extensor plantar response with powerful 
flexion at hip and knee, which is sometimes bilateral. 

Soon after the development of early signs of spastic weakness, 
loss of sensation involving all forms of sensibility makes its 
appearance, and gradually extends up to the level of the dis- 
tribution of the posterior root fibres of the segment immediately 
below the level of compression. Separating the region of sensory 
impairment from the higher levels of normal sensation, there 
may be a zone of hyperaesthesia in the distribution of the 
compressed roots, but this is not a constant finding. 

The abdominal reflexes are also abolished early below the 
level of compression. In the case of compression of the tenth 
thoracic spinal segment, for example, we should find spastic 
paresis of the lower limbs, weakness of the abdominal muscles 
below the level of the umbilicus, with deviation upw ards of the 
umbilicus on contracting the abdominal wall (Beevor’s sign), 
loss of the abdominal reflexes below^ the umbilicus, and sensory 
loss below the same level. Thus, motor, reflex, and sensory 
phenomena all contribute to estabhsh the segmental level of 
compression. 

Generally a little later than the establishment of motor and 
sensory symptoms, disturbances of sphincter control appear. 
At first, precipitancy of micturition and then periodical 
evacuation of urine occur, but the bladder is never completely 
emptied. There is alw^ays residual urine after this so-called 
reflex micturition, and the term overflow^ incontinence is a 
more accurate one to use in this coimection. 

With compression of fairly rapid onset, retention of urine 
may be the initial sphincter symptom. In respect of the bowel, 
constipation with fsecal incontinence after purgatives are the 
usual symptoms. 

By the time that paraplegia in flexion has developed, 
voluntary power, sensation and sphincter control are almost 
if not completely lost below the level of the lesion. Bedsores 
over the sacrum and trochanters develop, and septic absorption 
from this source and from cystitis hasten a fatal issue. 

There may be certain minor variations in this sequence 
of events. In the case of secondary carcinoma of the spine, 
symptoms of root compression predominate, and cord com- 
pression may be only a late and terminal phenomenon. 



914 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

In the case of spinal caries, the symptoms are commonly 
of equal intensity on both sides, and the cord sustains a 
generalised compression. With spinal nerve root tumours, on 
the other hand, the lateral position of the compressing lesion 
often leads to wholly or predominantly imilateral signs. A 
Brovm-Siquard syndrome may develop in these circumstances. 
The anatomy of the spinal cord and the course of afferent 
and efferent paths will indicate what this syndrome must be. 
On the side of the lesion there is spastic weakness of the 
corresponding leg, with the appropriate alterations in the 
reflexes. There is also loss of the sense of position and of 
vibration sense in the paretic limb, with some sensory ataxy. 
Tactile, thermal, and painful sensibility are intact. On the 
side opposite to the lesion, motor functions are intact, as are 
the sense of position and vibration sense, but there is loss or 
impairment of tactile, painful, and thermal sensibility. At 
the level of the lesion and on the same side, there may be a 
zone of hj’peraesthesia or of sensory impairment to all forms 
of sensation corresponding to the root actually compressed. 

Further, certain physical signs are peculiar to particular 
segmental levels of the cord, and are of importance in segmental 
localisation of the lesion. 

Motor Localisation, — The list of muscles with their segmental 
innervation given in the table below indicates the muscles in 
which wasting and other signs of a lower motor lesion must bo 
looked for at different segmental levels of compression. 

Segmental Representation of Muscles 

C. 4. Scaleni, trapezius, levator anguii scapulsB, diaphragm. 

C. 5. Levator anguii scapuhe, scaleni, supraapinatus, rhomboids, infra- 
spinatus, teres minor, biceps, braclualis anticus, deltoid, supinator 
longus (brachio-radialis), serratus magnus (s. anterior), poctoralis 
major (clavicular part). 

C. 6. Subscapularis, pronators, teres major, latissimus dorsi, serratui 
magnus, pectoralis major. 

C. 7. Triceps, extensors of wrist and digits. 

C. 8. Flexors of wrist and digits, smaU hand muscles. 

Th. 1. Interossei and small hand muscles. 

Th. 2 to 12. Intercostak, abdominal muscles. 

L. 1. Quadratus lumborum. 

L. 3. Sartorius, adductors of hip, ilio-psoas. 

L. 4. Quadriceps extensor femoris, abductors of hip. 

L. 5. Flexors of knee. 

8. 1. Calf muscles. 

S. 2. Glutei, peronei, anterior tibial muscles, small foot muscles 

S. 3,' 4. Pelvio muscles. 



COMPRESSION OF THE SPINAL CORD 


915 


Sensory Localisation, — Fig. 21 provides corresponding 
information for determining the segmental level from the 
sensory loss. 

Reflex Localisation, — Tendon reflexes, the reflex centres of 
which lie in the compressed segment or segments, may be 
abolished or changed. The segmental representation of the 
main tendon reflexes is as follows : biceps jerk, fifth cervical 
segment ; supinator (brachio-radialis) jerk, fifth and sixth 
cervical segment ; triceps jerk, sixth and seventh cervical 
segment ; knee jerk, fourth lumbar segment ; ankle jerk, 
first sacral segment. 

Lesions involving the grey matter of the fifth cervical 
segment may produce what is known as inversion of the 
supinator jerk. Thus this jerk is replaced by finger flexion. 
This sign is not infrequently seen in s^Tingomyelia, traumatic 
lesions of the cord due to dislocations or fractures of the 
cervical spine, and in spinal tumours at the fifth cervical 
level. Similarly, in lesions involving the first sacral segment, 
a hamstring jerk only may occur on tapping the tendo Achillis. 

The Cervical Sympathetic. — The signs of paralysis of the 
cervical sympathetic may be associated with lesions involving 
the lowest cervical and first thoracic segments or their spinal 
nerve roots. These are pupillary myosis, enophthalmos, and 
a narrowing of the palpebral fissure. Also lesions of the cervical 
cord, if they interfere with the bulbo-spinal sympathetic fibres, 
will produce this symptom-complex. 

Temperature disturbances are occasionally associated with 
cervical cord lesions. Of these hyperpyrexia is the commoner, 
but abnormally low temperatures (86°-90° F.) are very rarely seen. 

Conus M^uUaris and Cauda Equina, — The cauda equina 
includes all the spinal nerve roots below the second lumbar 
roots, and hence the motor and sensory symptoms resulting 
from compression of this structure will depend upon the 
particular roots involved. The motor symptoms will be of 
lower motor neurone type, that is, flaccid paralysis with atrophy. 
The knee and ankle jerks may be abolished. Sensory loss will 
be restricted to the area supplied by the lower four lumbar 
and aU the sacral dorsal roots. Frequently only the sacral 
roots are compressed. When this is the case motor symptoms 
are confined to muscles below the knee. There may be loss 
of the ankle jerk and sensory loss over the sacral root areas, 
t.e., the perineum and posterior aspect of the leg with the sole 
of the foot. Fractional parts of this motor and sensory 
symptomatology occur when a smaller number of roots are 
Involved. The sphincter disturbances corresponding to these 




COMPRESSION OF THE SPINAL CORD 917 

various lesions consist in overflow incontinence of urine with 
incontinence of faeces. 

In the case of the conus meduUaris also, the motor symptoms 
are very like those resulting from lesions involving the cauda 
equina, in being of lower motor neurone type and of comparable 
distribution. The sensory loss also is much the same, but 
there may occasionally be dissociated anaesthesia. The great 
pain of root distribution, which may attend lesions of the cauda 
equina, is commonly absent in conus lesions. 

We may appropriately refer here to the clinical picture 
characteristic of secondary carcinoma of the spine. There 
may be multiple deposits in the vertebrae, but the lumbar 
spine tends to be early and severely involved. The sequence 
of events is commonly as follows : Some two or more years 
after the excision of a carcinoma of the breast the patient, 
while making some physical effort, experiences sudden intense 
pain in the back. These “ alarm pains as they have been 
called, recur at increasingly short intervals and may be present 
for some months before examination reveals any local or 
neurological signs. Finally, the signs of compression of the 
lumbar enlargement and lower end of the cord make their 
appearance. Death usually intervenes, from the presence of 
malignant disease elsewhere in the body, before paralysis 
becomes profound. 

Diagnosis ol Gradual Compression. — The differential 
diagnosis of slowly developing spastic paraplegia may be 
attended with considerable diflSculty. In the case of vertebral 
disease, the develoi)mcnt of a localised tenderness or of local 
pain, or again of deformity, will reveal the situation and nature 
of the lesion. But both in malignant disease and in spinal 
caries, root and cord compression may appear before deformity. 
In this case radiography may reveal what clinical examination 
of the spine fails to show. Rigidity of the spine is common in 
vertebral disease, but may also occur in the case of meningeal 
or nerve root tumours. In the case of compression from 
disease (tumours, meningitis) within the vertebral canal, the 
presence of a great excess of protein in the cerebrospinal fluid 
(Froin’s syndrome) may confirm the presence of a local block 
in the subarachnoid space. The persistence of root pains, 
though not a constant phenomenon, is often of great diagnostic 
and localising value. In meningeal and nerve root tumours 
the signs of root and cord compression are commonly unilateral 
at onset but bilateral in vertebral disease. It is usually 
impossible to differentiate extra-medullary and intra-medullary 
spinal tumours. 



918 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


The differentiation of compression from other focal or diffuse 
cord lesions may also be difficult. In the so-called spinal form 
of disseminated sclerosis, careful examination will usually reveal 
one or other of the following signs : slight nystagmus, pallor 
of one or both optic discs, or a pathological increase in the 
tendon jerks of the arms, while a careful case history will 
reveal the long past occmrence of transient blindness of one 
or both eyes, of diplopia, or of temporary ataxy of an arm. 
Further, cutaneous sensory loss is very exceptional in early 
disseminated sclerosis, the usual sensory change being a loss of 
vibration sense in the legs, with or without slight impairment 
of the sense of position in these limbs. 

In a few cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, signs of 
lateral sclerosis (spastic peiresis of the legs without sensory or 
sphincter disturbance) may antedate the appearance of wasting 
in the hands. The patient is usually a middle-aged man, 
there is no history of root or other pains, and the arm and 
jaw jerks may be extremely brisk. Wasting of the intrinsic 
muscles of one or both hands commonly appears within a year 
of the onset of spastic weakness of the legs. 

The presence of spastic weakness of the legs with sensory 
changes showing a more or less distinct and a constant upf)er 
level, with reflex changes strictly confined to the regions Inflow 
this level, and the characteristic changes in the cerebrospinal 
fluid, are essential to a diagnosis of spinal compression, but 
some cases remain without one or other of these signs, and 
diagnosis cannot be certain without an exploratory laminectomy. 
An additional diagnostic method is now available in the intra- 
thecal injection through the atlanto-occipital membrane of an 
oily solution of iodine, named lipiodol. This being opaque to 
the X-rays and of considerable density, tends to sink in the 
theca until it encounters a block, where its retention may 
be revealed by radiography. This method involves skilled 
procedure and should be reserved for those cases where it is 
absolutely essential for a differential or a localising diagnosis. 
An alternative procedure is to inject lipiodol by tfio lumbar 
route, the patient being on a tilting X-ray table. The 
lipiodol then runs headwards to the lower limits of the 
obstructing lesion, where it may be radiographed. 

2. Sudden Compesssion of the Cord 

This is almost invariably the result of vertebral injuritss, 
but may occasionally result from the sudden collapse of a 
vertebral column which is invaded by malignant disease. In 



COMPRESSION OF THE SPINAL CORD 919 

the case of indirect violence the cervical spine is most commonly 
involved, fracture or fracture with dislocation occurring between 
axis and atlas, or between the fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae. 
Death commonly follows the first of these, but after the second 
every grade of spinal cord injury may be seen. Any violence 
which forcibly flexes the head on the neck, such as falls from 
horses or diving into shallow water, may produce fracture with 
dislocation between the fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae. It is 
important to remember that in such cases attention to the 
scalp woimd may lead to a neglect to consider the possibihty 
of vertebral injury. 

The other situation in which the spine may be fractured 
is the dorso-lumbar region. Falls fr^m a height in which the 
individual drops standing on his feet, or strikes his back on 
some projecting object, usually involve this region and produce 
severe crushing of the cord. 

Morbid Anatomy. — In severe compression the cord is pulped 
at the level of injury, and the damaged tissue rapidly necroses 
and becomes diffluent. At the upper and lower limits of damage 
oedema and serous effusion with slight haemorrhage are found. 
Later, there is a glial reaction with active phagocytosis at these 
points. If the subject survive long enough, ascending and 
descending degenerations are to be seen. 

In the less severe lesions sustained in most cases of fracture- 
dislocation of the lower cervical spine, the cord is only 
momentarily compressed or nipped, and may with the partial 
return of the vertebrae to the normal be freed from permanent 
compression. 

Symptomatology. — Sudden compression, even when the 
cord is not completely crushed, frequently results in complete 
flaccid paraplegia with total sensory loss below the level of 
the lesion. There is also retention of urine and intense 
priapism. Bedsores develop with extreme rapidity over the 
sacrum. In high cervical lesions death may ensue from 
paralysis of the respiratory muscles, while with lower level 
lesions septic absorption from bedsores or from a bladder 
infected by catheterisation may also lead to a rapidly fatal 
issue. 

When the structural damage is less severe, this stage of 
total interruption of conduction through the lesion is short 
and some return of power and of sensation occurs. In the 
case of the lower cervical spine, atrophy and paralysis of varying 
degree and extent is found in the arms (corresponding to 
damage to the grey matter of the crushed segments), with a 
varying degree of spastic paresis and sensory loss in the lower 



920 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


limbs. In some cases recovery is almost complete, but many 
patients are left with severe residual disability. The more 
severe grades of paralysis following injuries of the cervical 
spine are readily recognised, but the slighter grades may 
escape recognition. In these there is slight spastic paresis 
of the legs, with the appropriate changes in the reflexes, and 
some spasticity of the arms with wasting of the hand muscles. 
After the first few weeks, sensory loss may be minimal or 
absent and the condition is apt to be diagnos^ as amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. A history of sudden onset following a fall 
or injury involving the head or neck, the persistence of pains 
in the neck, shoulders, oi arms, limitation of movement of the 
neck, and inversion of tfle radial reflexes in the arras should 
make a correct diagnosis possible. 

Total Transverse Lesions of the Cord. — It will be mentioned 
that sudden transverse lesions of the cord, either traumatic or 
inflammatory (see Myelitis,” p. 1)27), may for the time 
produce a complete interruj>tion of conduction through the 
damaged segments, apart from anatomical solution of 
continuity. The clinical picture of such interru])tion consists 
of totiil flaccid paralysis and sensory loss below the level of 
the lesion, total abolition of the tendon reflexes and of the 
abdominal reflexes, and retention of urine. In res{>ect of the 
plant^xr responses, tlie initial finding varies. There may l)e no 
plantar response, there may be a plantar flexion movement of 
the great toe, or there may be a feeble Babinski tyj)e of 
response. The anal and bulbo-cavernosus reflexes are often 
preserved. The skin overlying the paralysed region is dry, 
and rapidly liccomes shiny and tends to crack. Bedsores 
appear rapidly unle.s.s great care is taken to prevent their 
formation. There may be marked oedema of the feet and 
ankles, which are cold. The isolated portion of the spinal 
cord, therefore, shows no reflex activity of any kind except 
in re8f)ect of the two reflexes mentioned as sometimes retained. 

If, with the exercise of great care, infection of the bladder 
and the development of tedsores te prevented, this initial 
stage of spinal shock gives place in about the third week to a 
slowly developing phase of spinal reflex activity. The limbs 
remain paralysed and completely insensitive, but the flexion 
reflex which was descrilxid in the introductory chapter to this 
section {vide p. 912) gradually emerges from shock. ITie 
receptive field of the reflex, that is, the area from which it can 
be elicited, spreads so as to include the whole sclc, and gradually 
during the course of weeks, spreads up the leg so as finally 
to include the skin of the whole limb and even the alKlominal 



COMPRESSION OF THE SPINAL CORD 


921 


wall below the level of the lesion. Any stimulus within this 
extended region will evoke the appropriate reflex response. 
Further, stimulation of deep structures (tendons and muscles) 
also suffices to evoke the response. The response itseK also 
progressively increases in extent and intensity. At first feeble 
dorsiflexion of the hallux and feeble contraction of the ham- 
strings alone occur ; later, flexion at ankle, knee, and hip are 
added, and finally, with complete restoration of reflex activity, 
almost any strong stimulus to the limb evokes a powerful 
flexion spasm, including dorsiflexion of ankle and toes. This 
response is often bilateral, and may be accompanied by powerful 
contraction of the abdominal muscles. When the last-named 
occurs the bladder is compressed, the sphincters are reflexly 
relaxed, and urine is forced out of the bladder. Also, retention 
gives place to j)eriodical evacuation of urine. But in both 
circumstances the bladder is not fully emptied, some residual 
urine being retained. It is probable that the bladder wall 
never contracts reflexly with any force after spinal cord 
transection, and therefore true emptA^ing of the bladder does 
not occur. Tlie term “ automatic micturition which has 
been given to this periodical passage of urine is, therefore, 
not accurate, since the phenomenon described above is only 
a mutilated fragment of the complete act. The knee and 
ankle jerks may reappear. 

With the passage of time the legs tend to go into the 
condition described earlier as that of paraplegia in flexion, 
and stimulation of the limb evokes, simultaneously, powerful 
bilateral flexion of the legs, the passage of urine, and an 
outburst of sweating over the paralysed parts of the body. 
This unphj^siological combination of reflex reactions has been 
called the mass reflex,’’ and its j)re8ence indicates the gross 
disturbance which transection produces in the reflex activity 
of the isolated segments of the cord. 

In the majority of cases the subject succumbs before the 
phase of spinal shock has been passed, and for the reasons 
which have been given. If he can be tided over this period, 
the tendency to the development of bedsores diminishes, the 
bladder does not require such frequent catheterisation and is 
not so readily infected, and life may be prolonged for years, 
but no restoration of motor or sensory function is possible. 

Treatment. — In the case of spinal caries, immobilisation of 
the spine in the supine position for a period of from six to 
twelve months is imperative ; even severe paraplegia may 
recover completely in these circumstances. There is obviously 
no effective treatment for cases of malignant disease of the 



922 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


spine, but severe pain may call for relief, which, seeing the 
inevitably fatal issue, may be given in the form of heroin or 
morphia if less potent agents fail. Deep X-ray therapy may 
give considerable relief from pain. Meningeal and nerve root 
tumours of the customary benign tj^pe must be removed, and 
if this be successfully done at a period before the development 
of marked sphincter paralysis, complete recovery of function 
and non-recurrence of the tumour may usually be anticipated. 
In cases of xmcertain diagnosis it must be remembered that 
removal of a tumour may mean recovery, while its non-removal 
certainly means complete paralj^is and death. This is also 
true where diagnosis rests between compression and intra- 
medullary disease, and whenever there is a reasonable 
possibility of a tumour being present and the segmental level 
of the lesion can be ascertained, laminectomy should be urged 
since the alternative is to leave the patient to his fate. 

In the case of sudden compression from fracture or fracture- 
dislocation, where it is certain that the cord is not completely 
crushed, or where total crushing is improbable, a decompressive 
laminectomy may be performed if radiography reveals a 
narrowing of the vertebral canal. Crushes of the cauda equina 
should always be treated by decompression in this way. 

When there are signs, either physiological or anatomical, 
of total division of the cord, treatment consists in protecting 
the patient from infection of the bladder when catheterisation 
is necessary, and in the prevention of bedsores. For the latter 
purpose the back must be washed with soap and water every 
four hours and the skin rubbed with spirit. The patient should 
be nursed on an air or water bed, and should from time to time 
be turned on to one or other side to prevent constant pressure 
on the tissues over the sacrum. Despite these precautions, 
rapidly deepening bedsores may develop and become infected. 
A septic discharging bedsore must first be cleansed by fomenta- 
tion, and then treated by being plugged with gauze saturated 
in eusol or other antiseptic fluid. Later, lotion, zinc 
oxide-castor oil ointment, or Friar’s balsam may be employed. 
A urinary antiseptic mixture should be given. 


SYRINGOMYELIA 

Syringomyelia is a chronic progressive disease of the spinal 
cord, characterised by the presence of a cavity of varying 
length within the cord. The cavity arises in a rest of embryonic 
tissue in the region of the central canal. This undergoes 



SYRINGOMYELIA 


923 


proliferation during early life and breaks down at its centre 
with the formation of a cavity. The symptoms appear during 
early adult life, and are the result of compression of normal 
structures in the cord by the enlarging lesion. 

iEtiology. — Both sexes are equally affected. There are 
said to be no hereditary or familial factors. Occasionally, 
however, symptoms may appear in childhood, and in some 
cases kypho-scoliosis developing at this period has been the 
first sign of the malady. It may be accompanied by the 
presence of other structural abnormalities of congenital 
origin, such as spina bifida, or deformities of the skull and 
bones. Hence the name “ status dysraphicus which has been 
applied to these conditions. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The glial proliferation, or gliomatosis 
of syringomyelia appears to originate in the neighbourhood 
of the grey commissure of the cord. On inspection the cervical, 
and less commonly the lumbar regions of the cord, may be 
irregularly enlarged, owing to the dimensions of the enclosed 
cavity at these levels. Serial sections through the cord reveal 
the presence of a central gelatinous mass of glial tissue 
enclosing a cavity, which varies in size from segment to 
segment and contains a fluid which may be clear and watery 
or glairy in consistence. 

In some regions the cavity is large and its glial wall thin ; 
in others a dense ghal mass contains a narrow cavity. The 
process may extend from end to end of the cord, and some- 
times passes upwards into the medulla. Here it has the 
appearance of one or more fissures radiating ventrally and 
laterally from the floor of the fourth ventricle and contained 
by walls of glial tissue. 

Degenerative changes in both grey and white matter are 
present, due in part to compression and m part to actual 
invasion and destruction of the nervous elements by the 
proliferating gUal tissue. 

The lower cervical and upper thoracic segments are 
almost always the region in which the nervous tissue is most 
severely damaged, and are therefore the regions to involve- 
ment of which most of the clinical manifestations of the disease 
are due. 

Symptomatology. — The nature and topography of the 
symptoms may be deduced from the situation of the lesion 
that has been described above. They may be classified as 
under : (1) Sensory changes due to compression of the sensory 
fibres subserving thermal and painful sensation, as these fibres 
pass from the posterior horn across by the grey commissure 



924 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


to the lateral column of the opposite half of the cord ; 
these may be interrupted over a number of segments. (2) 
Atrophic paralysis of lower motor neurone type of a distribu- 
tion corresponding to those segments in which the grey matter 
of the ventral horns is damaged. (3) Spastic weafcaess of the 
lower limbs due to compression of the pyramidal tracts, as 
these traverse the severely compressed segments. (4) Trophic 
and vasomotor symptoms. 

Serhsory Symptoms. — From what has been said above it is 
clear that there is commonly a dissociated sensory loss ” in 
sjiringomyelia. The forms of sensation which travel by crossed 
paths, namely, temperature and pain sensibility, are lost ; those 
which travel by an microssed path in the posterior column, 
namely, the sense of active and passive movement and certain 
aspects of tactile sensibility, remain intact. This dissociation 
is not constant, and in some advanced cases all forms may be 
impaired. The topography of this pecuUar sensory disturbance 
varies from case to case. The characteristic feature, however, 
is that there is both an upper and lower level of loss. The 
upj)er level may reach the hmits of the cutaneous distribution 
of the fifth cervical nerve or some lower level, while inferiorly 
it may reach any of the thoracic segmental areas. It rarely 
extends below the thoracic region. It may be unilateral or 
bilateral, and when bilateral may be asymmetrical. Sub- 
jective sensory disturbances are relatively infrequent, and 
when present generally consist of pain referred to one or more 
of the segments in which there is sensory loss. A common 
result of the loss of pain sense in the hands is that the subject 
bums his fingers when holding hot objects, and is made aware 
of the bum only by the appearance of a blister. On the hands 
of such a patient the scars and recent ulcers of such injuries 
may be a conspicuous feature. 

Mtiscular Atrophy. — Wasting is most frequently seen in 
the small hand and forearm muscles. It may, however, be 
found in other regions, such as the scapular region, and in the 
case of lumbo-sacral involvement, in the lower Umb. Like the 
sensory loss, it may be unilateral or bilateral and asymmetrical, 
the latter condition being more common. The wasting 
tends to reach a certain degree of intensity, and there 
to be arrested short of total loss of muscle fibre. In some 
muscles, however, it may become complete. Deformities 
of the hand are common, with severe wasting, claw-hand 
being the usual type. 

Spaaiic Paresis of (he Legs. — This is not a constant or an 
early feature, and does not usually become scwero. 



SYRINGOMYELIA 


925 


Tro2)hic and Vasomotor Symptoms. — Rarefaction of the 
bones of the- upper limb and Charcot’s osteoarthropathy in 
shoulder or elbow joints may be present. These lesions are 
particularly apt to occur in labouring men in whom the bones 
and joints are peculiarly exposed to strain. Extremely common 
is a condition of the hands in which they become red or cyanosed 
in colour and puffy in appearance and consistence, owing to a 
diffuse thickening of the subcutaneous tissues. Such a hand, 
when grasped, gives the examiner the impression of a soft 
boneless structure. This is the so-called “ succulent hand.” 
This state of the tissues and the particular habihty to injury 
dependent upon the analgesia, lead to the presence of infected 
wounds and ulcers, of whitlows, and sometimes to necrosis of 
the terminal segments of the digits. 

Cases with prominent deformities arising in this way were 
formerly spoken of as cases of Morvan’s disease. It is 
characteristic of lesions of the kind that they are painless 
throughout their course. 

Other symptoms sometimes met with are signs of paralysis 
of the cervical sympathetic (enophthalmos, myosis, narrowing 
of the palpebral fissure, and disturbance of sweat secretion 
over face and forequarter), when the last cervical and first 
thoracic segments are severely involved. Similarly the 
phenomenon of inversion of the supinator jerk, referred to 
in the section on “ Compression of the Spinal Cord,” may 
be met with (vide p, 915). 

Syringobulbia. — The signs indicating spread of the lesion 
into the medulla are nystagmus (involvement of the posterior 
[medial] longitudinal bundle), hemiatrophy of the tongue 
(involvement of the hypoglossal nucleus), rarely facial paresis 
(involvement of the facial nucleus), unilateral paralysis or 
paresis of the palate, pharynx and larjnx and sternomastoid 
(involvement of the vagus-accessorius nuclear complex), or 
analgesia of a peripheral zone of the face (involvement of 
the spinal root of the trigeminal nerve). Of all these, hemiat- 
rophy of the tongue, sensory loss on the face, and nystagmus 
are the most frequently encountered. 

Skeletal Deformities. — Kypho-scoliosis is practically a con- 
stant phenomenon in syringomyelia, and may reach an extreme 
degree of deformity. Other deformities are asjmimetry of the 
skull and pes cavus, and occasionally spina bifida. A number 
of cases in which syringomyelia and acromegaly have been 
associated are on record. 

Course. — The progress of the disease is usually very 
gradual, and may be completely or partially arrested for 



926 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

a long period of years at any stage. Rarely, haemorrhage 
into the cavity or its sudden distension may lead to an acute 
increase in symptoms, and sometimes to severe paraplegia of 
the legs. Intense pain is apt to accompany these events. 
Death may ultimately ensue aifter many years from respiratory 
paralysis or from intercurrent affections. 

Diagnosis. — In the early stages this may be rendered 
difficult by the fact that muscular atrophy may precede sensory 
loss ; or conversely, sensory loss of dissociated type may appear 
before there is any wasting. In either case, the presence of 
spinal and other deformities is of diagnostic value. In respect 
of the motor symptoms, the combination of wasting of the 
forearm and hand muscles, with signs of spastic weakness of 
the legs, is common to both syringomyelia and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. In the latter there is no sensory loss, the 
tendon jerks in the arms are exaggerated, there are no skeletal 
deformities, and the patient is commonly a middle-aged man. 
Intra-meduUary or extra-medullary tumours of the cervical 
region of the cord may also produce a comparable motor 
picture. Here also skeletal deformity is absent, and there is 
sensory change, not dissociated in type and involving all the 
body below the level of the lesion. Progressive paraplegia with 
sphincter disturbance and root pains of constant distribution, 
and the absence of trophic and vasomotor symptoms, all serve 
to distinguish compression by meningeal or nerve root tumour 
or by pachymeningitis from syringomyelia. 

Hsematomyelia, in which the topography of the lesion is the 
same as that seen in syringomyelia, may present a comparable 
clinical picture, with the exceptions that trophic, vasomotor, 
and skeletal signs are absent and that the onset is sudden 
in the former. Cervical rib, when it is manifested by the 
development of wasting of the muscles of one hand and by 
pain in the arm, may be mistaken for an early manifestation 
of syringomyelia. In the former, the signs remain unilateral 
and confined to the arm, there is little or no sensory loss of 
any kind, and the wasting is selective in incidence, in many 
cases being confined to opponens and abductor poUicis. 

Treatment — The drugs usually employed are potassium 
iodide and mercury, the latter being given by inunction. 
X-ray therapy to the region of the cervical spine has been 
extensively employed but with imcertain results. It may 
relieve pain in those cases where this is a distressing feature. 
In general, we may say that the malady is uninfluenced by 
any form of treatment and slowly progresses unchecked. 



NECROTIC MYELITIS AND MYELOMALACIA 927 


ILEMATOMYELIA 

True haematomyelia is a rare condition. Commonly said 
to be traumatic in origin, the fact is that crushing injuries of 
the spinal cord produce softening but not massive haemorrhage. 
Such haemorrhage when it occurs is associated with abnormalities 
in the spinal vessels or with other forms of arterial disease ; 

in syphilis. The symptoms consist in a sudden develop- 
ment of a paraplegia, usually cervical in level, with severe pain. 
Thereafter a more or less incomplete recovery process sets in. 


ACUTE AND SUBACUTE NECROTIC MYELITIS 
AND MYELOMALACIA 

Under these titles we deal with cases of paraplegia of acute 
or subacute origin that become complete and flaccid and usually 
end fatally. 

iEtiology. — ^As the titles imply, the pathogenesis of these 
rare cases is obscure. The acute cases have in the past been 
called ‘‘ acute infective myelitis,’^ but no tiling is known of 
their bacteriology. Some of them appear to result from throm- 
bosis of spinal arteries and others from a primary obliterative 
sclerosis of small intra-medullary and meningeal vessels in the 
lower segments of the cord. The degeneration of the cord 
appears secondarj" to the vascular lesions. To express the 
current view that they are toxi-infective in origin is to reveal 
how little we know of their causation. 

Morbid Anatomy. — In the so-called necrotic cases the areas 
of spinal cord necrosis are associated w ith a small obliterated 
artery, and sometimes with thickening of the larger Veins. The 
necrosis affects the gray matter more severely than the white. 
In frank spinal arterial thrombosis the affected segment or 
segments of the cord become soft and diffluent, and all 
signs of normal structure are lost. The cerebrospinal fluid 
usually shows a small increase of cells (lymphocytes) and 
of protein. 

Symptomatology . — ^The onset may be febrile or afebrile. In 
the acute cases paraplegia develops rapidly and becomes 
complete (syndrome of total transection) within a day or two. 
In the subacute cases, this state is reached writhin two or three 
weeks. The paralysis may ascend after its initial appearance. 
The patient may succumb early, or may survive with profound 
paraplegia, sensory loss, and sphincter paralysis. In the latter 



928 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


case a final stage of paraplegia in flexion, or of parapl(‘gia in 
extension, may be reached. 

Diagnosis. — The possibility of syphilitic ineningo-myelitis, 
which is more frequently seen, has to be considered, and when 
this is present the cerebrospinal fluid will show an increased 
cellular and protein content, a positive Wassermann reaction 
and the colloidal gold reaction described on page 861. In elderly 
persons, spinal thrombosis may be responsible for a sudden 
complete paraplegia. In this case the cerebrospinal fluid 
remains normal. 

Treatment. — The lesion is established so rapidly that little 
but symptomatic measures can bo carried out. It is of the 
utmost importance to protect the bladder from infection should 
catheterisation be necessary, and to prevent the development 
of bedsores. Therapeutic lumbar puncture may conceivably 
be of value, and the administration of massive doses of hexa- 
mine may be tried. 


SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION OF 
THE SPINAL CORD 

This is a malady of middle-aged and elderly {X^rsons of both 
sexes, and presents the clinical jucture of a progressive lesion 
of the posterior and lateral columns of the spinal cord. It is 
associated with pernicious anaemia. Sometimes the cord lesion 
precedes the blood change and dominates the clinical picture, 
but in other cases the symptoms of a nervous lesion may occiu* 
during the course of a full}' developed pernicious anaemia. 

iEtiology. — The disease is uncommcm before the fourth 
decade of life. Its aetiology is that of j)emicious anaemia, 
to which the reader is referred (p. *151). 

Morbid Anatomy. — The cord is normal in ap[x>arancc on the 
surface, but on section the posterior and lateral white columns 
present the translucent apj>earance of degeneration. The foci 
of this change lie in the centre of the posterior column and 
deep in the posterior part of the lateral column. With the 
development of the disease they enlarge progressively until 
they reach the surface of the cord, and include all the white 
matter except that immediately surrounding the grey matter 
and containing the short proprio-spinal fibres. 

Microscopically, demyelinisation and destruction of axis 
cylinders with the presence of vacuolisation, where fibres 
have been completely destroyed, constitute the essential lesion. 
There is strikingly little neuroglial or vascular reaction, a 



SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION 929 


feature which distinguishes this disease from all other spinal 
cord diseases. The process is most intense in the thoracic 
segments of the cord, but extends up as far as the brain stem. 
The cell bodies of degenerated nerve fibres show secondary 
changes. In some cases considerable peripheral nerve degenera- 
tion of the limb nerves may be seen, even greater in intensity 
til an the cord changes. 

Symptomatology. — The onset of nervous symptoms may be 
preceded by periodical gastro-intestinal disturbances : slight 
fever, diarrhoea alternating with constipation, pain in the 
hypochondrium, and occasionally jaundice. Attacks of this 
kind sometimes punctuate the course of the developed disease. 
The onset is usually slowly progressive, and the initial symptoms 
consist of subjective sensory disturbances in the extremities, 
especially in the feet. The patient complains of feelings of 
wetness, coldness, numbness, of tingling, and of “ pins and 
needles.” Similar, but less distressing, parsesthesiae may be 
present in the fingers, wliich begin to lose fineness of co- 
ordinated movement with their appearance. Paki below the 
costal margin of “ girdle ” character is common, and may 
become more marked during the febrile reactions associated 
with the occasional bouts of diarrhoea. 

Examination at this stage reveals in many patients the 
peculiar colour of complexion and the shiny atrophic tongue of 
pernicious aiuemia, though these signs may be absent. The 
blood may present changes identical with those of the various 
degrees of pernicious amemia, but in many early cases very 
little deviation from normal may be found, although ultimately 
severe aiuemia usually develops. Jt has been mentioned that 
achlorhydria is extremely common in subacute combined 
degeneration, but it is not yet possible to say that it is an 
absolutely constant finding. The spinal cord symptoms vary 
according to whetluu' the posterior or lateral white columns 
are predominantly alfected. Usually the former are earlier 
involved, but by tlie time definite symptoms appear the presence 
of a Babinski plantar resjK^nse indicates lateral column affection. 
Two clinical tyjms may be recognised : (i) Flaccid Type , — In 
this posterior column symptoms may predominate, namely, 
weakness and fiaccidity of the lower limb muscles with some 
degree of sensory ataxy and of Rombergism, absence of the 
tendon jerks, and impairment of cutaneous sensibility of minor 
degree* over the distal parts of the limbs. The calf and plantar 
muscles are almost invariably tender to pressure, a clinical 
indication of the peripheral neiwe degeneration which is alw ays 
foimd on microscopic examination. It is possible that further 

59 



630 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

observation will indicate that peripheral neuritis plays a more 
prominent part in some cases of the malady than has hitherto 
been thought. Indeed, in some instances the physical signs 
are — at least in the early stages of the malady — quite indis- 
tinguishable from those of a peripheral neuritis. Sooner or 
later, however, the apj>earance of a Babiiiski plantar response 
indicates the presence of spinal cord changes, while the 
associated blood changes help to distinguish the case from 
an ordinary one of peripheral neuritis. 

(ii) Spastic T ype . — In other cases lateral column signs 
predominate, namely, spastic weakness of the legs with 
increased tendon jerks, clonus and the Babinski plantar 
response. As the paralysis increases, painful and powerful 
flexor spasms make their appearance, and the final condition 
is one of paraplegia-in-flexion. Sometimes this symptom- 
complex gives place to that described above as the posterior 
columns are progressively involved. 'N'ariations of this kind, 
from case to case and from stage to stage in a gi\'en case, 
indicate the '^development of the process in the j)osterior and 
lateral colunms of the cord, and so far from rendering diagnosis 
difficult constitute one of the most ( haracteristic; features of 
the malady. 

As the disease advances, motor weakness and sensory loss 
increase, the patient l^ecomes bedridden, and if anamiia be 
present the characteristic signs thereof are added to those of 
the cord lesion. As a rule the functions of the cranial nerves 
are unaffected. Slight oedema of the optic disc is occasionally 
seen, and retinal haemorrhages may lie a terminal phenomenon. 
If a severe grade of anaemia accomjianies these nervous 
symptoms, mental disorder may make its apiiearance. 
Memory is defective, and the patient IxjcomcH irritable and 
confus^. In extreme cases the patient may Ik? delusional 
and diflScult to handle. Tlie cerebrospinal fluid is usually 
unaltered. 

Prognosis* — It is not jxissible in the jiresent advancing state 
of knowledge to make a definite statement as to prognosis. In 
many cases of pernicious anaemia in whic h a}>proi)riate treat- 
ment has restored the blood to an aj)proximately normal 
condition, the signs and 8ymj)tomB of a cord lesion have under- 
gone no corresponding degree of improvement, and may even 
have increased in severity until tlie patient becomes paraplegic. 
On the other hand, in early cases, and especially those in whom 
the signs are those refentKi to above as resembling a jKuripheral 
neuritis, remarkable improvements may be achieved. The 
severely spastic cases, as might be exj)ected, ro8iK>nd much 



SUBACUTE COMBINED DEGENERATION 931 


less favourably and frequently not at all. The final stage of 
the disease is then one of profound cachexia with motor, 
sensory, and sphincter paralysis, and the various compUcations 
which arise from this state however produced. 

Diagnosis. — In typical cases the clinical picture is so 
characteristic as to be readily recognisable. The patient is 
over forty years of age, yellowish in colour with a malar flush, 
pale mucosa\ and a shiny tongue, though these signs are 
not constantly present. The signs of a postero -lateral de- 
generation of the cord complete the picture. When anaemia 
is absent, and the picture of spastic paresis of the legs 
is present, disseminated sclerosis can generally be excluded 
by the age of the patient, the presence of cutaneous sensory 
loss, and absence in the history of the visual symptoms 
which often occur early in the course of disseminated sclerosis. 
Moreover, the prominence of paraesthesiae in subacute combined 
degeneration is rarely a feature of disseminated sclerosis. 
With absent tendon jerks and flaccidity of the lower limb 
muscles, tabes may be excluded by the absence of the tabetic 
pupillary abnormahties, of the sensory loss on face and trunk, 
and by the presence of muscular tenderness in place of the 
muscular insensitiveness to pain of tabes. The cerebrospinal 
fluid also renders the recognition of tabes possible. A slowly 
developing jwlyneuritis may more closely resemble an early 
subacute combined degeneration with posterior column in- 
volvement predominating than either of these maladies, 
and in the absence of an extensor or Babinski type of 
plantar response, differentiation may for a time be difficult 
until the progress of the malady reveals signs of lateral column 
degeneration. 

Treatment. — Whether the blood picture be certainly that 
of }>emicious anaemia or not, the treatment of subacute com- 
bined ‘degeneration of the cord is that of pernicious anaemia, 
hut mare j^ersisiently and mare intensively carried out. The 
improvement in the nervous symptoms must be the sole guide 
in this respect, and no precise rules can be laid down. Intra- 
muscular injections of a liver extract may be necessary daily 
for throe or four weeks before a progi'essive improvement 
sets in. 

As has been said, the spastic type of subacute combined 
degeneration frequently makes no response whatever to 
treatment, but the flaccid type, especially in its early stages, 
will often improve in a remarkable manner if treatment be 
continued over a long period, and maintenance doses of 
a liver extract be given from time to time. 



932 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


Details of treatment are given under the heading of 
pernicious anaemia {vide p. 356). 

If an anaemic patient respond to this treatment, the ataxy 
of gait and the weakness may be dealt with by carefully graded 
re-education exercises and by massage. In the terminal 
stages of the malady, sleeplessness, pain, flexor spasms in the 
legs, cystitis, and bedsores may all call for aj^propriate 
symptomatic measures. 


THE HEREDO FAMILIAL ATAXIES 

This group of associated maladies includes several ehnical 
types of motor disorder, which deix?nd for their resfxjctive 
features upon a varying incidence of degenerative changes in 
the parenchAunatous elements in cerebellum, brain stem, and 
cord. As the title of the group indicates, hereditary and 
famihal factors are the rule. 

.etiology. — Direct or indirect inheritance is present in 
most instances, and several members of a family may be 
affected, both sexes being equally liable. The symptoms 
commonly make their ap{>earance during childhood. Beyond 
these simple facts of ob8er\’ation nothing is known of their 
causation, but it is probable that a developmental defect is 
responsible. 

Morbid Anatomy. — Usually, there is no maeroscojnc abnor- 
mality of the nervous system. The essential lesion is a primary 
neurone degeneration, with an associated secondary neuroglial 
reaction. In the spinal cord, the jK>sterior column fibres and 
the two spino cerebellar tracts on the afferent side, and the 
pyramidal tract on the efferent, are the neurone systems most 
commonly affected, hi the brain, cerebellar neurones, both 
intrinsic and projection systenrs, cortico-spinal fibn*S, and 
retinal neurones are the systems usually involved. Not all 
these systems are involved in each tyj^e. Thus, in Friedicich's 
ataxy, the incidence of the lesion is in the jxjsU^rior and lateral 
columns of the cord, while in certain forms of cerebellar ataxy, 
cerebellar neurones alone present pathological changes. 

The following clinical types are descrilxd : — 

Friedreich’s Ataxy. — A disease developing slowly during 
childhood, frequently affecting more than one meralx^r of a 
generation and characterised by the signs of progressive 
degeneration of j> 08 terior column, pyramidal and Bpino-cerel>ellar 
fibres, and by certain skeletal deformities. 

Jiliology . — It commonly makes its apj>caranco during the 



THE HEREDO-FAMILTAL ATAXIES 933 

second five years of life, but may not do so until adult life is 
reached. It tends to develop progressively until the subject is 
disabled, but its course may be arrested in the early stages before 
gross disability is produced. While the malady is commonly 
repoi'tcd in generations preceding the one which comes under 
observation, single cases occurring in a stock other\vise free 
from all trace of nervous disease may occur. 

Morbid Ancitomy , — Degeneration of the exogenous fibres of 
the posterior columns and of pyramidal and spino-cerebellar 
fibres with resulting sclerosis of the posterior and lateral 
columns are found. There may also be degenerative changes 
in the cells of Clarke’s column (nucleas thoracicus). 

Symptomatology . — The sym})toms of the disease are the 
natural result of a lesion of the fibre systems named above. In 
the legs are found the characteristic signs of postero -lateral 
cord degeneration, namely, weakness and flaccidity of the 
musculature, absence of the tendon reflexes, the extensor type 
of plantar response, and im})airment of the sense of position 
with a corresponding degree of sensory ataxy. 

In the arms, signs referable to disturbance of cerebellar 
function predominate, namely, tremor and unsteadiness of 
movement. 

The arms aiul head show fine jerky movements when the 
muscles which innervate the limbs and neck are in action. 
Similarly, the facial and articulatory musculature may be 
affected with the jjroduction of facial twitching and disorder 
of articulation, A fine nystagmus is the rule. 

All these symptoms develop insidiously. At first the child 
becomes unsteady on its feet, tends to stumble and fall, and to 
have difficulty in changing ])osition. In some eases the child 
has never been normally nimble on ite feet from early childhood. 
Later, the gait becomes markedly unsteady and the arms also 
show" disorder of movement. 

In addition to these indications of nervous disorder, certain 
skeletal deformities are the rule : kypho-scoliosis of the 
thoracic spine and pes eavus. A rare symptom is optic atrophy 
with visual defect. Other congenital anomalies have been 
recorded such as congenital morbus cordis. 

The course of the disease is usually very slow ly progressive, 
although, as has been stated, arrest may occur at any stage. 
Death usually results from intercurrent maladies after the 
patient has become disabled and bedridden. 

Treatment . — Tlie course of the malady is not materially 
influenced by any mode of treatment, but its progress may 
be delayed and the final stage of complete disability may 



934 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


sometimes be put off by careful massage and remedial 
exercises. 

Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxy. — This comparatively 
rare malady develops somewhat later in life than Friedreich's 
ataxy, occasionally in a family one member of which presents 
the latter disease, and resembles it pathologically and clinically 
in certain respects. Thus, there is degeneration of the spino- 
cerebellar and pyramidal fibre systems, as in Friedreichs' 
ataxy, but also degeneration of neurones within the cerebellum. 
Clinically, the same signs of cerebellar disturbance are seen 
namely, nystagmus, articulator^' disorder, tremor and ataxy, 
and in the lower limbs the phenomena of spastic weakness 
with their appropriate reflex alterations. Primary optic 
atrophy may occur. 

Cerebellar Atrophy. — ^There are two forms of this 
primary cerebellar degeneration : (1) cortical atrophy, and 

(2) atrophy of the white matter (the so-called olivo-ponto- 
cerebellar atrophy). 

Clinically, these are usually indistinguishable, and consist 
of a gradually increasing cerebellar ataxy involving the limbs 
and the musculature of articulation. Nystagmus may be 
absent. The patient is commonly a middle-aged or elderly 
adult. The malady is slowly progressive and does not respond 
to treatment. 

PROGRESSIVE MUSCULAR ATROPHY 

General Considerations on Muscular Wasting. — Muscular 
atrophy may result from disease primarily affecting the muscle 
fibre itself, or from disease of the motor neurone innervating it. 
In the differential diagnosis of the various clinical conditions 
which present muscular wasting, the following factors are of 
importmee : (1) the mode of development and the distribution 
of wasting ; (2) the presence or absence of certain peculiarities 
in the w'asting muscle (fibrillation, tenderness, changes in 
direct and electrical excitability) ; (3) the presence or absence 
of signs of co-existing disease of the nervous system ; and (4) 
the presence or absence of heredo familial factors. 

Cases of muscular atrophy fall into four main groups : (a) 
primary muscular dystrophy (myopathy) and certain allied 
conditions ; (b) progressive muscular atrophy of spinal origin ; 

(c) muscular atrophy secondary to paralysis of nervous origin ; 

(d) atrophy of muscles following arthritis. 

The differential criteria given above may now be considered 
in detail. 



PROGRESSIVE MUSCULAR ATROPHY 935 

1. Mode of Development and Distribution, — Speaking 
generally, the wasting of muscular dystrophy and of pro- 
gressive muscular atrophy are very slowly progressive, the 
weakness being a result of the wasting. In post-paralytic 
atrophy weakness precedes wasting, and may be sudden in 
onset, while the wasting is more gradual. Bilateral symmetry 
of wasting is characteristic of muscular dystrophy. In pro- 
gressive muscular atrophy the wasting, although bilateral and 
often symmetrical in incidence, is rarely symmetrical in degree, 
since wasting appears in one limb earlier than in its fellow, 
and remains more advanced in the earlier affected muscles. 
When wasting of the intrinsic muscles of one hand remains 
unilateral for more than a year, the presence of a cervical rib 
may be suspected. Of equal significance is the incidence of 
the wasting throughout the musculature generally. Thus, in 
muscular dy8tro|)hy the muscles of the limb girdle and the 
proximal limb segment are predominantly and often exclusively 
affected, wdiile in progressive muscular atrophy wasting 
commonly begins in the distal limb muscles and remains most 
intense in these. Again, in muscular dystrophy the face 
muscUvs are often affected, but those of deglutition, respiration, 
and phonation escape. The reverse is the rule in progressive 
muscular atrophy. 

In arthritis the muscles affected are those proximal to the 
joint, and particularly the joint extensors, e,g., the vasti in 
arthritis of the knee-joint. 

2. Features of the Wasti7ig Muscles . — The irregular clonic 
twitchings of small muscle fibre bundles knowm as fibrillation 
are a ])rominent feature in progressive muscular atrophy, 
inconstant and slight in peroneal muscular atrophy and 
post-paralytic atrophy, and absent in muscular dystrophy. 
In muscular d 3 '^strophy and progressive muscular atrophy the 
wasted muscles are painless on pressure ; in w asting secondary 
to a lesion of a peripheral motnr nerve they are commonly 
extrernelj" tender to j)reasure w'hile wasting is in progress. In 
muscular d 3 \stro})hy the mechanical and electrical excitability 
of the mus(*les wane progressiveh’^ and finally disappear, 
without the latter undergoing any qualitative change. In 
progressive muscular atrophj’^ and in post-paralj'tic w'asting 
the mechanical excitability is increased, and at a certain stage 
of wasting the reaction of degeneration maj" be present. In 
muscular dj'strophy alone, the association of wasted with 
enlarged muscles is seen, the enlargement (pseudo-hypertrophy) 
being due to fatty and fibrous infiltration of the muscle. 

In two muscular diseases, dystrophia myotonica and 



936 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Thomsens disease, a condition of myo tonus or delayed 
relaxation is seen. 

3. Signs of Nervous Disease , — ^Apart from an inevitable 
disappearance of tendon reflexes in wasted muscles there are 
no signs of nervous system involvement in muscular dystrophy, 
but such signs are found in progressive muscular atrophy and 
in post-paralji:ic atrophy. 

4. Age ami Heredo-familial Factors . — Muscular dystrophy 
commonly begins in infancy, childhood, or adolescence. 
Progressive muscular atrophy is a disease of adult life. In the 
latter heredo-familial factors are absent, but are constant i?i 
muscular dystroph 3 \ 

Motor Neurone Disease 

Progressive Muscular Atrophy, Chronic Bulbar Palsy, and 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. — Under these headings are 
described a single pathological process consisting in a primary 
degeneration of motor cells of the anterior horns of the cord, or 
of certain cranial nerve nuclei, and also in a degeneration of the 
lateral white columns of the sjunal cord. The clinical jhcture 
varies according to the incidence of the motor cell degeneration, 
and also according to the relative degree of latoral column 
degeneration. In some cases the latter may not be evident 
clinically, while in others it dominates the clinical picture. 
Three main clinical t} 7 XJ 8 of the malady are described, but 
mixed types occur. 

etiology. — Rarely the disease may develop in the second 
decade of hfe, but the greatest frequency of ctise incidence is 
in the fourth decade. Males are more frequently affected than 
females, and this predominance increases with the age of onset. 
Its causation is quite obscure, and as is common in such circum- 
stances, trauma is sometimes invoked as a causative factor, 
but without conclusive evidence. A comparable clinical picture 
is sometimes produced by syiihilis, but syphilitic amyotrophy 
runs a somewhat different course, and is generally distinguish- 
able both on clinical and serological grounds. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ITiere are no striking macroscopical 
abnormalities in brain or spinal cord. The latter, 8c*en in a 
section stained by the Weigert method, shows pallor of the 
lateral columns, particularly of the pyramidal traxjts, and some 
change of this kind is seen even in cas(?s which, during life, 
presented no clear signs of pyramidal tract involvement. 

By the Nissl method the motor nerve cells in the affected 
regions are found to be diminished in number the remaining 



PROGRESSIVE MUSCULAR ATROPHY 


937 


cells being shrunken and altered in form and appearance. A 
slight degree of secondary neuroglial proliferation may be seen. 
Similar changes are found in the cranial nerve nuclei when the 
incidence is bulbar, while the Betz cells of the cerebral motor 
cortex may also be involved. The wasted muscles show all 
degrees of muscle fibre atrophy. 

Symptoms. — When the symptoms are referable, wholly or 
almost so, to degeneration of cells in the cervical segments of 
the cord, we speak of progressive mitscular atrophy ; when there 
are signs of an associated lateral column sclerosis we speak of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, while in the case of a bulbar 
incidence of the nerve cell degeneration we speak of chronic 
bulbar pa}^. This differentiation of the malady into three 
chnical tj^pes is artificial, since a given case may present signs 
of all three, and this in varying proportion. In simple pro- 
gressive muscular atrophy, so called, wasting usually makes 
its first appearance in the intrinsic muscles of one hand. 
This w^asting is sometimes preceded by transient local aching 
pains and by panesthesite. The w^asting may advance slowly 
up the hmb, involving successively the shoulder girdle and 
scapular muscles, including the lower half of the trapezius, 
the rhomboids, serratus magnus (S. anterior) and latissimus 
dorsi, and finally the neck muscles, including the stemo- 
mastoid, and the muscles of respiration. Weakness foUow’S 
wasting and is in proportion to the degree of the latter. 

The wasting muscles fibrillate freely, and their mechanical 
irritability tap contraction is greatly increased, and the 
reaction of degeneration may be present. The interval between 
the involvement of the two arms is generally a matter of several 
months, but usually less than one year. The progress of the 
disease varies from case to case. The wasting may become 
arrested before the region of the shoulder girdle is invaded, or, 
on the other hand, progress may be ra})id and involvement of 
the neck and respiratory muscles may result in death within 
tw'O years from the ap])arent onset of the malad}". The degree 
and extent of the fibrillation generally gives some indication 
as to which of these two courses the malady is likely to run 
in a given case, free and widespread fibrillation, involving 
muscles not yet wasting, being of bad i)rognosis. 

Chronic Bulbar Palsy. — Tliis is the expression of a 
degeneration of thejnotor cranial nerve nuclei, identical with 
that which may occur in the cervical region of the spinal cord. 
It is seen more frequently in males during the fourth and fifth 
decades of life. From the topography of the paralysis it is 
often spoken of as “ labio-linguo-laryngeal or “ labio-linguo- 



938 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

pharyngeal ’’ palsy. The onset and progress are slow. The 
tongue is earliest and most severely affected. An indistinctness 
and laboured quality of the articiilation is the first symptom, 
and may at the onset appear only on fatigue. Later the 
mobility of the tongue and lips becomes deficient, the tongue 
shrinks, becomes wrinkled, and fibrillates freely. Later, the 
larjmgeal and suprahyoid muscles and those of the soft palate 
are involved. The articulation becomes unintelligible and the 
voice weak and nasal in quality. Weakness of the lips and 
of the soft palate allow dribbling and regurgitation of fluids 
through the nose, and when the phar 3 ntigeal muscles are affected 
deglutition becomes diflScult. In these circumstances particles 
of food are apt to enter the glottis, with the production of an 
aspiration pneumonia and death. This symptom-complex may 
exist alone or be associated with the wasting of the liml^ 
already described ; the bulbar symptoms may usher in the 
disease or be a late complication. 

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. — One or both of the above 
clinical pictures may be associated with signs of sclerosis of 
the lateral white columns of the cord and of p 3 nramidal fibres in 
the brain stem. These signs predominate in the lower limbs, 
which may become spastic, with increased tendon jerks, clonus, 
and a Babinski type of plantar response. The most common 
clinical form of the disease is that in which wasting of the 
upper limbs and spastic paresis of the lower limbs are combined. 
Either group of symptoms may usher in the malady. It is 
probable that most cases of so-called primary lateral sclerosis 
are examples of this disease, in which lateral sclerosis antedates 
progressive muscular atrophy in the arms. Although wasting 
and fibrillation predominate in the arms, signs of lateral sclerosis 
involving the upper limb musculature in its consequences are 
seen in increased tendon jerks and increased mechanical irrit- 
ability. The brisk jaw jerk so frequently seen in amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis is another sign of pyramidal tract sclerosis. 

Unlike what is found in certain other diseases in which the 
pyramidal tracts are the seat of change, the abdominal reflexes 
are not abolished early in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 

Most difficult of diagnosis are those cases of progressive 
muscular atrophy with ^bar symptoms in which wasting of 
the lip, tongue, laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles is minimal, 
but phenomena of impaired upper motor neurone function 
predominate. Here the tongue is small and spastic, there is a 
tendency to emotional overaction of the face musculature, and 
wasting in the upper limbs is slight. Such cases somewhat 
resemble the condition known as pseudo-btdbar palsy, but the 



PERONEAL MUSCULAR ATROPHY 


939 


gradual onset and the clinical course with ultimate develop- 
ment of muscular wasting generally serve to exclude the latter. 

Prognosis. — In all except a few cases of the cervical cord 
variety, where arrest may occur, the disease steadily progresses, 
and ultimately proves fatal from pulmonary complications 
within three years from onset. 

Treatment. — There is no treatment which materially 
influences the course of the disease in any of its clinical 
varieties. Strychnine and the use of electrical stimulation of 
the affected muscles are useless, and, indeed the latter may be 
harmful and there is no justification for its use. The avoidance 
of fatigue and all forms of stress and the maintenance of the 
general health are all that can be profitably attempted. The 
administration of vitamins E and B#, for which extravagant 
claims have been made, has now been shown to be of no value 
in either motor neurone disease or muscular dystrophy. In 
bulbar palsy the patient has least difficulty with semi-solid food. 
Even in cases of syphilitic amyotrophy arrest of the progress of 
the wasting is generally the best that can be hoped for. 
Circumstances often make the assumption of the passive role in 
treatment thus indicated very difficult to maintain, but it must 
be remembered that the adoption of active local measures such, 
for example, as electrical stimulation, does little but exhaust 
the patient. 

Progressive Spinal Muscular Atrophy of Children 
(Werdnig-Hoffmann). — The aetiology of this relatively un- 
common disease is unknown. It may occur in several members 
of a generation, and both sexes are equally affected. It develops 
from birth or during the first six months of life. 

Symptoms. —The apparently healthy infant begins to lose 
power, the trunk and proximal limb muscles being most severely 
affected. The reflexes are abolished, and electrical excitability 
of the muscles disappears. The sphincters are imaffected, and 
there is no sensory disturbance or mental deterioration. 

Death takes place within from three to five years. The 
lesion is an atrophy of the ventral hom cells and of the ventral 
nerve roots. The malady is uninfluenced by treatment. 


PERONEAL MUSCULAR ATROPHY 
{Neuritic, or Charcot-Marie- Tooth Type) 

This disease is a form of slowly progressive muscular wasting 
of characteristic distribution. It is both familial and hereditary 
and makes its appearance in one of the first three decades 



940 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


of life, most commonly towards the end of childhood. Males 
are more frequently affected than females. It may first 
become manifest after an acute specific fever. Its aetiology 
is unknown. 

Symptoms , — AVasting first develops in the plantar muscles 
and then in the peronei, long extensors of the toes and calf 
muscles ; later the muscles of the lower third of the thigh 
are affected. When the malady has been present for some 
years, wasting may make its appearance in the small hand 
muscles ; ultimately both feet and hands become deformed. 
The wasting first invades the distal part of a muscle and later 
extends to its proximal portion. In this wa 3 % when the lower 
third of the thigh is wasted, the limb above the knee assumes 
the form of an inverted Indian club. 

The wasting is frequently, but not constantly bilaterally 
symmetrical. The progress is so extremely slow that the 
subject may reach middle age before being seriously disabled. 
Fibrillation in the affected muscles may be seen, but is never 
marked. 

The ankle jerks disappear as the calf muscles become 
involved, and later the knee jerks also disapjx^ar. There may 
be impairment of all forms of sensation over the wasted 
territory of the limb. 

The disease does not shorten life and is not amenable to 
treatment, though the foot-drop may call for mechanical 
support. 

Morbid Anatomy , — ^There is degeneration of the posterior 
white columns of the cord and also of anterior horn cells, 
the anterior nerve roots are shninken, and the branches of 
the peroneal nerve may show some interstitial neuritis. 


MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 
(Myopathy) 

Under this heading, we deal with a condition in which the 
skeletal muscles from congenital defect and progressive patho- 
logical change undergo atroph 3 \ Th®re is no associated lesion 
of the nervous system, and the disease is a primary one of the 
muscles themselves. 

The IBtiology is unknown, but may lye of the nature of a 
qualitative defect in the embryonic tissue in which differentiated 
muscle fibres arise. It commonly occurs in several generations 
of a family and in the members of one generation; The malady 
may be transmitted by either sex and may occur in either. 



MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 


941 


The pseudo-hypertrophic variety predominates in males, but 
the other varieties are more equally distributed between 
the sexes. 

Morbid Anatomy. — The muscle fibres are diminished in 
number and the interstitial tissue is increased in some muscles 
to such a degree that little or no contractile tissue remains. 
In the enlarged muscles fat globules are deposited in the 
fibrous tissue. Microscopically, the muscle fibres are shnmken, 
vacuolated, and altered in form, and their nuclei are increased 
in number. 

Symptomatology. — The malady develops during infancy or 
childhood. It is slowly progressive, and although in the 
pseudo-hypertrophic form some of the muscles are enlarged, 
the general progress is towards wasting of the affected muscles. 
The initial symptoms vary according to the clinical variety of 
the disease present. In many cases the child has never been 
normally nimble on its feet, and may have learned to walk 
and stand imduly late. Attention is called to the condition by 
the child’s waddling gait, its tendency to faU, with a resulting 
difficulty in regaining the erect posture. In these circum- 
stances the child rolls over on to liis face, gets on to hands and 
knees, and then proceeds to cfimb up its legs by moving the 
hands alternately upwards on the limbs. Weakness of the hip 
extensors and contracture of the flexors lead to the adoption 
of an extreme lordosis, and weakness of the shoulder girdle 
muscles to winging of the scapulae. 

Certain muscles are constantly affected. These are the lower 
part of trapezius and of pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, 
serratus magnus (S. anterior), biceps and triceps, and in the 
lower limbs the adductors and hamstrings. When pseudo- 
hyiKjrtrophy is present it mvolves erector spinae, the masseters, 
deltoid, spinati, sometimes biceps and triceps, and in the lower 
limbs the calf muscles, vasti, and glutei. Both wasted and 
enlarged muscles are weak, and the weakness is in proportion to 
the degree of atrophy of contractile tissue. The mechanical 
and electrical excitability of the affected muscles progressively 
wane and disappear, the electrical excitability undergoing no 
qualitative change such as the reaction of degeneration. 
Fibrillation does not occur. Ultimately, kypho-scoliosis and 
contractxire and deformity of the legs develop in the pseudo- 
hyi)ertrophic form of the disease. The tendon jerks become 
e^eebled and disappear as the relevant muscles waste. There 
is no sphincter defect and no sensory change. The following 
clinical varieties a^e recognised, but mixed forms are 
common. 



942 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

PsKTOO-HYPERTTROPHio Type. — This is usually seen in 
males, is the commonest tj)^, and develops during the first 
decade of life. The subjects do not reach adult life, becoming 
bedridden within a few years of onset and succumbing to 
some intercurrent disease, generally to pulmonary or intestinal 
infections. A waddling gait and enlargement of the calves 
may first attract attention to the child. The topography 
of wasting and pseudo-hypertrophy have already been 
stated. 

ScAPtrLO-HXJMERAi. (Ebb’s) Type. — This occurs in children 
and adolescents of either sex. It is more slowly disabling than 
the pseudo-hypertrophic variety, and the patients reach adult 
life. Weakness of the shoulder and then of the pelvic 
girdle muscles, with winging of the scapulse and lordosis 
and with wasting of the muscles concerned, are the features 
of this variety. Occasionally some enlargement of muscles 
is seen. 

FACIO-SCAPTrLO-HTTMERAL (I^NDOUZV-DeJERINE) TyPE. — 
This resembles the preceding t^^je, but in addition there is 
marked weakness of the facial musculature, with thickening 
and eversion of the lips. The eyelids cannot be closed nor the 
teeth covered. 

Distae ok Simple Atrophic Type.— This relatively rare 
type differs from those described above in that the incidence 
is in the distal limb muscles mainly, the facial muscles being 
affected later. 

In all forms the ocular, lingual, laryngeal, and pharyngeal 
muscles are intact. 

Diagnosis. — The factors governing differential diagnosis 
have been stated in the chapter dealing with “ Progressive 
Muscular Atrophy ” (p. 936). 

Prognosis. — Recovery is unknown in any form of myopathy. 
In general it may be stated that the earlier in life the condition 
appears the more rapidly does it progress. The usual termina- 
tion is from some pulmonary complication. In the pseudo- 
hypertrophic type the patient does not reach adult life, lxK:oraing 
be^dden and dying within five or six years of the onset. In 
the other types, progress is much more gradual and adult life 
may be reached. 

Treatment. — ^From what has been said above, it is clear that 
no material influence is exerted on the malady by any form 
of treatment. Attention may most profitably be directed to 
retarding the development of contracture and deformity by 
means of massage and of such active exercises as the patient 
may be capable. 



MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 


943 


Myatonia Congenita ( Amyotonia Congenita) 

A rare disease of infancy, thought by some authorities to 
be identical with the simple atrophic variety of muscular 
dystrophy, but difiFering from this in that there is a tendency 
to gradual and partial recovery. It is undoubtedly a familial 
and possibly an hereditary malady, certainly closely allied to 
myopathy. The new-born child has small and extremely soft 
muscles, which render possible an abnormal range of passive 
mobility of the limbs. There is no wasting and no associated 
signs of nervous lesion. 

The child is not able to sit up or to hold its head erect imtil 
the second year of life, and may never be able to stand or walk. 
Occasionally, however, the capacity to do this may develop. 
The malady is not amenable to treatment. 

Myotonia Congenita {Thomsen's Disease) 

A very rare heredo-familial disease of obscure nature and 
origin, characterised by a peculiar tonic spasm and delayed 
relaxation of the muscles on voluntary effort. The only 
discoverable lesion is an enlargement of the muscle fibres, 
which are poorly striated.' It develops during childhood, and 
the myotonia is always maximal on resuming activity after 
rest. There is not much weakness and sometimes the muscles 
may be enlarged, assuming herculean proportions. All the 
skeletal muscles may be affected. Its progress is extremely 
slow, and there may be some degree of associated mental 
impairment. It is not amenable to treatment. 

Myotonia Atrophica {Dystrophia Myoionica) 

A rare heredo-famihal disease of unknown aetiology, develop- 
ing during early adult life and occurring usually in males. It 
is characterised by atrophy of the facial muscles, of sterno- 
mastoid, of the forearm, hand and leg muscles, and also by 
myotonia, which is best and most constantly seen in the facial 
and tongue muscles, m the flexors of the forearm, and in 
the calf muscles. Percussion or electrical stimulation of the 
myotonic muscles evokes a slow localised contraction and 
delayed relaxation of the muscle fibres. Voluntary contraction 
is also followed by the same delayed relaxation. The patient 
.has a myopathic facies, with considerable weakness of the 
facial musculature. Associated with these symptoms are 
mental deterioration, premature baldness, cataract, and atrophy 



944 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


of the testicles. There is usually a history of presenile cataract 
in the generation immediately preceding the myotonic genera- 
tion, and of senile cataract in the second generation. The 
myotonic generation, therefore, is the third abnormal generation 
in the family. A myotonic individual has, however, bwn known 
to become the father of a healthy child. It is clear from the 
wide range of symptoms that something more than a purely 
muscular disease is in question, and it is probable that we are 
dealing with a degenerative disease, developing over more 
than one generation and involving other structures than the 
musculature. Of its morbid anatomy little is known. Quinine 
in 5-gr. doses twice or thrice daily reduces the myotonia 
appreciably. 


Family Periodic Paralysis 

This is a rare heredo-familial malady developing in 
childhood or adolescence, and characterised by attacks of 
paralysis affecting mainly the thoracic and })roximal limb 
muscles. These often come on during the night or during 
periods of rest, and reach a maximum within a few hours, 
passing off again after a similar interval. As weakness develops, 
the tendon reflexes and the electrical excitability of the muscles 
wane and disappear. Consciousness and sensation are un- 
impaired. An occasional ptosis is the only sign of muscular 
involvement within the distribution of cranial nerves. 

Death is reported to have occurred during an attack. 
Potassium chloride in 10 to 15 gr. doses will avert or cut short 
an attack. 


MYASTHENIA GRAVIS 

Although there is rarely any muscular wasting in this malady 
it may appropriately be considered here, since the constant 
feature in its symptomatology is a disturbance of muscular 
power without discoverable nervous system disease. There 
are no heredo-familial factors. 

iBtiology. — It is of unknown fctiology, is slightly more 
common in women than in men, and develo{>s during adolescence 
or early adult life, though rarely an onset in elderly {lersons is 
seen. Occasionally it coexists with exophthalmic goitre. 
.There is reason to think that the essential disorder in this 
disease has its seat in the neuromuscular junction. When the 
nerve impulses reach this junction acetyl-choline is liberated 
and renders the muscle fibres sensitive to the nerve impulse* 



MYASTHENIA GRAVIS 945 

But if this substance be not liberated, or if it be prematurely 
destroyed, muscular contraction either fails or is inefiEective. 

One or other of these abnormalities is probably present in 
myasthenia gravis. It has been found t^t the injection of 
physostigmine (or of the synthetic product “ Prostigmin ”) 
will temporarily abolish this defect and cause the complete — 
or almost complete — disappearance of all the symptoms of 
myasthenia gravis in a very dramatic fashion, the effect lasting 
for two or three hours. Where diagnosis is uncertain, this 
fact provides us with a diagnostic test. Four cubic centimetres 
of prostigmin with gr. of atropine sulphate (to check the 
peristalsis which would otherwise occur) are injected h3rpo- 
dermically, and in about half an hour the patient’s muscular 
condition is approximately normal, and so remains for a few hours. 

Morbid Anatomy. — An enlarged persistent thymus is 
commonly but not constantly found. Small foci of mononuclear 
cells (lymphorrhages) are foimd in the muscles, especially 
the oculomotor muscles, the liver, and the myocardium. 
Occasionally there may be some muscular atrophy with 
degenerative changes in the muscle fibres. Nothing is known 
of the significance of these changes. 

Symptoms. — The essential symptom is the rapid develop- 
ment of fatigue and transient paresis in voluntary muscles. 
Muscles supplied by both cranial and spinal nerves are affected. 
The extrinsic ocular muscles are almost constantly affected in 
varying degree, and in a given case may for long periods be 
exclusively involved. Ptosis, variable squints, and diplopia, 
dropping of the jaw and weakness in mastication, weakness of 
phonation, articulation, and deglutition may all occur, and any 
of the trunk and limb muscles may be similarly affected. In 
severe cases, the least exertion may produce a transient 
weakness of the muscles employed and render the patient 
incapable of any activity. In some instances the muscular 
affection is severe and widespread, and death may occur 
within a few months of onset from failure of the respiratory 
muscles. In other cases the malady runs a chronic course, 
and in these the ocuk muscles are predominantly or even 
exclusively affected, and permanent paralysis of ocular move- 
ment may result. If this involve all the ocular muscles the eyes 
come to rest m the median position and diplopia disappears. 

Occasionally the pupillary reactions are defective, while 
ptosis may be replaced by lid retraction and some exophthalmos. 

Striking variations in the clinical course of the malady 
occur, and patients apparently m grave danger of respiratory 
paralysis may regain power and remain for long periods free 
6o 



946 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM . 

from symptoms. Faradio stimulation also temporarily exhausts 
the muscle, which may cease to react for some seconds. Usually 
the tendon jerks remain active and inexhaustible. 

Diagnosis depends largely upon the variability of the 
sjrmptoms, upon their increase by exertion, and by the absence 
of qualitative change in the reflexes or of sensory loss. 

Prognosis. — ^As has been said above, the malady may prove 
rapidly fatal, may undergo apparent arrest or long remission, or 
may become localised to the ocular muscles and remain chronic 
over a long period of years. It is probable that the younger 
the patient and the wider the involvement of limb and trunk 
musculature, the worse the prognosis as to duration of life. 

Treatment. — ^AU exertion or emotional excitement must be 
avoided. Massage and electrical stimulation of the muscles are 
contraindicated. There is no certainly effective method of 
treatment for this malady. The influence of prostigmin is 
temporary, and its repeat^ administration may lead to grave 
increase of weakness after the effects of a given dose have 
passed off. The dose for intramuscular injection is 1 to 2 mg., 
and atropine sulphate (iJ/i gr.) may be given with it to inhibit 
the peristalsis it evokes. P^stigmine may also be given 
orally, from four to eight 15-mg. tablets being the daily dosage, 
so spaced as to facilitate the taking of food. Again, a single 
dose may tide the patient over a period of respiratory 
embarrassment. 

Some cases maintain an improved level of muscular power 
when kept on ephedrine sulphate gr. t.d.s.), and favourable 
results have also been claimed for glycine (50 to 100 gr. twice 
daily). Complete or almost complete remissions of very long 
duration (months or years) are not uncommon and render 
the assessment of treatment difficult. Cood results in some 
cases have followed the removal of the thymus, but whether 
these will prove to be permanent it is still too early to say. 


POLYNEURITIS 
(Multiple Peripheral Neuritis) 

Under these titles we are concerned with a strikingly 
uniform reaction of the nervous system to various poisons 
which also simuitaneously affect the heart muscle. While 
the damage suffered by the peripheral nerves is responsible lor 
the clinical manifestations of polyneuritis, tlie central neurones 
of brain and spinal cord do not escape, and themselves present 
pathological changes. With certain exceptions it is the 



POLYNEURITIS 


947 


functions of the spinal nerves which are affected, and one of 
the features of the condition is the bilateral synunetry of the 
paralyses and other symptoms. The ess^tial lesion is' a 
parenchymatous degeneration of the nerve fibres. 

Attiology. — ^Despite the apparent diversity of the poisons 
which give rise to it, polyneuritis displays a remarkable clinical 
and pathological uniformity. A wide range of chemical sub- 
stances, from arsenic to alcohol, and such complex substances 
as the exotoxins of diphtheria may give rise to it ; while it 
develops in typical form in such metabohc disturbances as 
beri-beri and ^abetes. Finally, it is not uncommonly en- 
countered when no discoverable cause is operative. In these 
circumstances, we may ask whether these diverse agencies do 
in fact act directly upon the nervous system to produce a single 
mode of reaction, or whether they may perhaps do so indirectly, 
and in virtue of a common disoider of metabolism induced by 
them ; a disorder in the course of which a single toxic metabolite 
is produced in the body to become the direct neural and myo- 
cardial poison. We cannot yet say that such an h3^the8i8 
covers every setiological variety of polyneuritis, but there is 
evidence suggesting that many varieties are so induced ; tjg,, 
beri-beri, alcoholic polyneuritis, and the polyneuritis which 
is occasionally seen in gastric ulcer or carcinoma or in 
hyperemesis. 

Carbohydrates are essential to the metabolism of nerve 
cells, and vitamin is essential to their oxidation within the 
cell. In the absence of this vitamin this breakdown in the 
nerve and cardiac cells is arrested at the stage of pyruvic add 
formation, and it is conceivable that this substance is toxic for 
the nervous system. It has to be remembered, however, that 
in beri-beri, the best established example of avitaminosis, 
the symptoms and the lesions are referable, not to nerve cells 
in the brain, but to the axis cylinders of jwripheral nerves. 
Therefore, it is evident that the chain of processes leading to 
the development of a polyneuritis in the presence of vitamin Bj 
deficiency still contains undiscovered lii^. 

It has been suggested that vitamin B^ defidency may arise 
either from deficient vitamin intake (as in beri-b^) or from 
defective absorption of vitamins in the alimentary canal (as 
in gastric ulcer and hyperemesis). 

However, whatever the facts may ultimately prove to show, 
there remains a considerable residue of cases of polyneuritis, 
both acute in onset and of gradual development and chronic 
course, in which in the present state of knowledge it is impossible 
to invoke any mode of avitaminosis. Such are ibe varietks of 



948 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

polyneuritis known as Landry’s paralysis, acute febrile poly- 
neuritis and a more chronic variety often associated with 
some papilloedema and a great increase of protein in the 
cerebrospinal fluid. These are found to occur in subjects 
apparently healthy, adequately nourished and free from all 
discoverable infections. 

In short, the problems of pol 3 meuritis are still far from 
complete solution. 

It is customary to include lead among the metallic poisons 
producing polyneuritis, but both clinically and pathologically 
the nervous affections arising from lead poisoning differ from 
polyneuritis and therefore lead paralyses will be dealt with 
separately. This applies also to the clinico-pathological 
phenomena associated with other chemical poisons, such, for 
example, as carbon disulphide. 

The symmetry with which the peripheral nerves, mainly 
those innervating the limbs, are involv^ in polyneuritis and 
the associated myocardial affection justify the assumption that 
the various poisons concerned circulate in the blood stream 
and gain access to the nervous system from this source, but in 
the case of one form of polyneuritis, namely, diphtheritic 
paralysis, there occur certain “ local paralyses ” which suggest 
another possible channel of access of poisons to the neurone, 
namely, the perineural lymphatic space. 

Morbid Anatomy. — ^The essential lesion in the peripheral 
nerve fibre is a parenchymatous d^eneration, most intense at 
its distal part. The myelin sheath is most severely damaged, 
being broken down into fat globules. The axis cylinders are 
d^enerated, and there is proliferation of the oeUs of the sheath 
of Schwann. A less severe degree of fibre change and some 
nerve cell change is also seen in the brain in long-standing oases. 
In fatal cases the heart muscle shows fatty infiltration and 
myocardial d^eneration. 

Cerebrospinal Flnid. — This usually shows no abnormality, 
but a slight increase in the protein content is sometimes found. 
Rarely the increase may Ira considerable and the fluid of a 
yellow colour. 

Symptoms. — ^The following description applies to the poly- 
neuritis of alcohol, arsenic, and of organismal toxins, with 
certain qualifications to be given later. The onset is insidious. 
For we^ or evmi months before disability ensues the patient 
complains of painful cramps in the caU muscles at night and of 
aching in the leg muscles on exertion. There are alro tingling 
and subjective numbness of the extremities. Examination at 
this stage reveals tenderness of the hmb muscles to pressure, 



POLYNEURITIS 


949 


especially of the calf and plantar muscles, slight blunting of aU 
forms of cutaneous sensibility over the feet, and occasionally 
over the hands. The arm jer^ are generally brisk, and the knee 
jerks also, but almost invariably there is diminution or loss of 
the ankle jerks. As the malady progresses weakness develops 
in the muscles below the knee, foot-drop becomes evident 
and gives rise to the so-called “ steppage ” gait in which the 
patient overflexes the 1^ in walking to clear the ground with 
the dropped feet. This phenomenon is not so much due to a 
selective weakness of the dorsiflexors as to the natural dropping 
of the foot under gravity, and examination will reveal that 
plantar flexion is also weak. With progressive weakness the 
patient is ultimately confined to bed, and muscular wasting 
appears. The arms are similarly but often later and less 
severely involved. Simultaneously with these motor changes 
the tendon jerks in arms and legs finally disappear, and loss, 
or rather impairment, of all forms of sensibility develops. 
This last, like the weakness and wasting, is most profound over 
the distal segments of the limbs. When loss of the sense of 
position is marked before weakness takes the patient off his 
legs, Rombergism and ataxy of gait make their appearance. 
Only in exceptional and very severe cases does weakness or 
sensory loss invade the trunk. Sphincter control remains 
intact. If the condition be allow^ to progress, profound 
wasting of limb muscles with fibrous contracture and deformity 
develop. Foot-drop is thus rendered a permanent deformity, 
and the legs tend to become fixed in flexion. Trophic and 
vasomotor disturbances are present, and of a severity propor- 
tionate to the motor and sensory disturbances. The skin of 
the feet becomes cyanosed and clammy and may perspire 
freely. The skin of the fingers becomes shiny and thin and 
the mlHl’llurved and rigid. 

Pain in the affect^ muscles and cutaneous hyperalgesia 
may be extreme. In all developing and advancing cases of 
polyneuritis there are signs of myocardial involvement, of 
which, while the patient is bedridden, tachycardia and possibly 
some dilatation of the heart are the most constant. In the 
pol 3 meuritis of diphtheria and in beri-beri there is a special 
Uability to sudden fatal heart failure. 

Altoholio Nbubitis. — This is now a relatively uncommon 
disease in the United Kingdom. The majority of the patients 
are women addicted to steady drinking. In many chronic 
alcoholics there are to be found on examination the initial signs 
of a polyneuritis, which never develops fully. Characteristic 
of the polyneuritis due to this poison is the extreme tenderness 



960 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

of the muscles and the severity of the weakness and wasting 
seen in some cases. There may also be intense superficial pain 
and hypersesthesiffi of the extremities. Bilateral facial weak- 
ness is sometimes seen. 

AssKinoAi. Neubitis. — Single massive doses of arsenic or 
repeated small doses, given therapeutically or otherwise, may 
pi^uce polyneuritis. It has be^ known to occur from the 
free application of an arsenical paste to a lai^e ulcer. 

In cases in which single or repeated large doses have been 
given, a history of acute gastro-intestinal and cardiac symptoms 
may be obtained, and in these circumstances a mental state 
comparable to Korsakow’s psychosis (vide p. 1029) may occur. 
The general course and symptoms are similar to those described 
above. Wasting and contracture may be extreme, and the 
skin of the palms and soles shows a condition of hyperkeratosis, 
while on the abdominal wall there may be seen the characteristic 
arsenical pigmentation. In such cases arsenic may be identified 
in the skin, hair, and urine. 

DiPUTUEBmo Neubitis. — ^The sequence of events is rather 
different from that described above, and the clinical picture 
contains elements absent from the neuritis due to poisons other 
than the toxin of diphtheria. This difference, however, is 
entirely doe to the fact that the poison- gains access to the 
system from a sMctly localised and peci^r focus, namely, 
from the fauces. At the end of the first or during the second 
week of diphtheria there may develop regui^tation of fluids 
through the nose, a nasal quality in the voice, and a defect 
of near vision. These phenomena are due to paralysis of the 
soft palate and to paralysis of accommodation, and they may 
persist for any pmiod up to three or four weeks from the date 
of appearance. Sometunes ptosis, squint, and diplopia occur. 
No other nervous symptoms may develop in the ptttlent, but 
in some cases at about the fifth or sixth week, and oftmi as 
the palatal and ocular phenomena are clearing up, the patient 
develops a pdiyneuiitis like that described above. 

It differs, however, in some minor details. Its development 
is more rajHd than that of the pol 3 meuritis due to alcohol, and 
it very rarely leads to long-standing paralysis or wasting. In 
fact, ^phth^tio paralysis is perhaps the only oiganio nervous 
diseMe in which the patient’s relataves may with some confidence 
be given the assurance that complete and permanent recovery 
wittim from six to eight months will ensue ; it ia the commonest 
form of polyneuritis in children. From time to tiwM> cutaneous 
uid wound infection the diphtheria bacillus ooours, and may 
be followed by diphtiieiitio paralysis. In such oases, howevmr, 



POLYNEURITIS 951 

the initial palatal paralysis is absent, and is replaced, though 
not in all cases, by an initial “ local paralysis ” of muscles at 
or near the site of the focus of infection. It is probable that 
while the polyneuritis is a blood-borne intoxication of the 
nervous system, the initial ‘‘ local ” paralyses are the result of 
an ascending perineural l 3 rmphatic infection. 

Polyneuritis in other infections resembles the polyneuritis 
of diphtheria. 

I^ABBTio Neuritis is due to the action of toxic substances 
produced during the course of an aberrant metabolism. It is 
rarely as severe as the forms that have been considered above 
but may be discovered in the routine examination of a diabetic 
subject. On the other hand, a form of peripheral neuritis 
characterised by severe ataxy and by intense pains in the legs 
like those of tabes dorsalis may occur during the course of 
diabetes. To this the name pseudo-taAes peripherica has been 
applied. Again, a sudden severe neuritis of a single nerve may 
occur, with resulting paralysis and sensory loss. The ulnar and 
anterior tibial nerves may be affected in these circumstances. 

Bsri-Bebi is also a form of toxic polyneuritis, the aberrant 
metabolism responsible in this case arising from the use of a 
diet lacking in vitamin Bj. Clinically and pathologically it 
resembles the forms described above, differing only in the 
presence in some cases and at some stage of their course of a 
generalised oedema. 

Acute Febrile Polynkuritis ( Acute infeciive Polyneuritis, 
Landry's Paralysis), — It is probably a single condition that is 
referred to by these three titles. Following a brief and some- 
what featureless febrile ilbiess, a severe and rapidly developing 
poljmeuritis develops, often with facial diplegia, and in fatal 
cases with a rapidly ascending paralysis of the trunk muscles 
leading to respiratory paralysis. When death does not ensue, 
the extent and severity of the paralysis tends to wane rapidly, 
though complete recovery may be delayed for some months. 
Pain and sensory loss are minimal in this variety. 

Erythrcedema Polyneuritis (Pink Disease), — This is a 
disease of early childhood, in which a short-lived febrile 
reaction is followed after a variable interval of from a day to 
two or three weeks by an acutely developing polyneuritis ; with 
this is associated a bright eiyi^hematous rash, insomnia, 
anorexia, and marked mental dejection. 

The nature of the sjmptoms named will suggest the lines 
of treatment neoeesary. These include careful feeding, the use 
of drugs to secure sleep, local treatment to relieve the intense 
irritation caused by the rash. 



962 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

The combination of polyneuritis and intense erythema are 
characteristic of the malady. 

Most cases, if carefully tended, recover in from nine to 
twelve months. 

Prognosis of Polyneoritia. — ^This necessarily depends upon 
the severity of the paralysis, the degree of wasting that has 
occurred and the presence of contracture when this has been 
allowed to occur. If in a case of acute onset, treatment is 
adequately carried out from the outset a virtually complete 
recovery can be looked for, thoiigh it will take close upon 
twelve months at least to secure. In the case of a relatively 
nuld post-diphtheritic paralysis recovery may occur sooner 
than this, but the patient wiU probably not be ready to resume 
normal activity in less than six or nine months. The presence 
of deformity, of course, renders recovery slower and less perfect. 

Treatment. — ^Even in mild cases in which no severe d^ree 
of paralysis is present, rest in bed is the first essential of treat- 
ment imtil improvement has definitely begim. The associated 
cardiac condition is another indication for rest. 

There can be no doubt that a premature return to physical 
activity after mild and undetected ^phtheria may be responsible 
for the development of a polyneuritis which the subject might 
otherwise escape, and therefore, particularly in the mild cases 
of polyneuritis associated with infections, caution in this respect 
is most important. In severe paralysis, the maintenance of a 
good position of the limbs is essential, and the legs should be 
kept extended, adducted, rotated in, and with the feet 
supported. When the forearm muscles are severely involved, 
similar precautions are necessary. The presence of pain may 
prevent any active manipulation or massage of the limbs, but 
this should be carried out when possible. Electrical stimula- 
tion of the muscles is of no value, and may do harm if strong 
currents are employed. In the matter of drugs, pain may 
require treatmmit % aspirin and allied compounds, but the 
morbid process cannot be directly influenced by drugs. General 
tonic treatment is indicated, and strychnine is a useful agent. 
In alcoholic cases some attempt may be made to deal with the 
addiction. Since it is possible that there is a common aetiological 
factor of a metabolic order underlying most or all forms of 
polyneuritis, and it has been shown experimentally that a diet 
defective in vitamins A and Bj may lead to nerve fibre degenera- 
tion, the administration of these substances, therefore, is 
rational in polyneuritis. These may be given in severe oases 
in the form of vitamin B| concentrates in daily mtramusoular 
doses of from 20 to 100 mg., continued as long as necessary. 



POLYNEURITIS 


963 


They may also be given in the form of yeast — ^half an ounce of 
baker’s yeast daily, or as Marmite. It is, of course, not to be 
expected that the results will be as dramatic as have been 
recorded in the so-called experimental beri-beri of birds, and 
the use of these preparations does not dispense with the 
necessity for the other therapeutic measures already mentioned. 
Indeed, it caimot yet be said that the duration of the illness and 
of the ensuing disability have been lessened in polyneuritis 
since intensive vitamin Bi therapy has become general. 


Lead Paralysis and Encephalopathy 

The general features of lead poisoning are dealt with else- 
where (p. 254), but we may say here that involvement of the 
nervous system may occur both in industrial and accidental 
poisoning with lead. When it occurs, the patient as a rule 
presents the general features of plumbism and gives a history 
of lead colic some weeks or months before the onset of nervous 
symptoms. The so-called lead palsy is the commonest nervous 
sequel of lead poisoning. The extensors of the fingers are 
first affected, then the extensors of the thumb, except the 
extensor ossis metacarpi poUicis (abductor pollicis longus) 
which may be little affected, and finally the wrist extensors. 
The supinator longus (brachio-radialis) commonly escapee, as 
does also the flexor group of muscles. “ Wrist-drop ” is the 
most striking result of this selective paralysis. In some 
instances there appears a slowly progressive wasting of the 
intrinsic muscles of the hands, associate with a corresponding 
degree of weakness. In severe cases the upper arm muscles 
may also be involved, deltoid, biceps, and brachialis anticus 
being most severely paralysed. R^ly, a similar condition 
may be seen in the legs. 

In subjects of chronic lead poisoning not presenting this 
characteristic picture of lead palsy, tremors, cramps in the 
muscles, and shooting padns in the limbs may be present. 

Prognosis and Treatment . — ^The paral 3 r 8 is of the extensors 
under appropriate treatment, namely, rest in the position of 
relaxation and massage, may completely recover, but the 
atrophy and weakness of the hand muscles t^d to be 
persistent. 

The ordinary measures, described elsewhere, for the elimina- 
tion of lead from the system are employed. , 

Lead Encephalopathy. — ^Disturbance of cerebral fimctions 
may also be a result of le^ poisoning, tmd is indeed the oornmcm 
mo^ of nervous involvement in children. Convulsions, 



964 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

delirium, and coma coming on acutely, sometimes associated 
with fever and ending in death, may occur. Chronic oases 
also occur with recurrent convxilsions and progressive mental 
deterioration. The character of the physical disturbances 
vary widely from case to case. Papillcedema and residual 
paralytic s3unptoms of hemiplegic character are common in 
the cerebral forms of plumbism. 


INTERSTITIAL NEURITIS 

Under this heading is described a common affection 
characterised clinically by (1) severe pain in the course of a 
nerve plexus or nerve trunk, with tenderness of the affected 
nerve on pressure ; (2) pain and tenderness in muscles supph'ed 
by the affected nerve trunk or plexus ; (3) hypersestheeia and 
parsesthesise in the cutaneous distribution of the affected nerve 
or plexus ; (4) the absence in most, though not in all, cases of 
any severe degree of motor or sensory loss. Pathologically, 
the lesion consists of an inflammatory swelling of the connective 
tissue elements which knit the nerve bundles and tnmks 
together. 

iBtiology and Pathology. — Interstitial neuritis is a malady 
of adult life. It is conunonly associated with flbrositis, and 
arises by a direct extension of the inflammatory process from 
fascial structures in the neighbourhood of nerve plexuses and 
trunks. A common example of this association is the develop- 
ment of sciatica in coimection with lumbago. Occasionally 
arthritic processes in joints may spread to adjacent nerve 
trunks. Tlie causation of flbrositis and of interstitial neuritis 
remaiiis extremely obscure, and whether infection or metabolic 
disorders, of the type of which gout is an example, are in 
question is unknown. The widely accepted view that connects 
oral sepsis with flbrositis and interstitial neuritis is somewhat 
speculative, but has led to much unwarranted and fruitless 
extraction of teeth. Common precipitating factors are trauma 
and exposure to cold. 

A severe interstitial neuritis, generally of the brachial 
plexus, is an uncommon sequel of injection of sera, nearly 
alwa^ of anti-tetanic serum. Rarely, diphtheria antitoxin 
administration may be followed by a localised interstitial 
neuritis in a nerve trunk. 

If the nerve trunk be exposed at opmation during the acute 
stage of the malady it is seen to be swollen and hypwismio, 
and when the sheatii is incised there is a serous exudation. 



SCIATICA 


955 


In long-standing or recurrent oases sclerosis of organised 
exudate and new fibrous tissue may lead to scarring and 
constriction of the nerve. 

The common seats of the process are the trunks entering 
into the brachial and sacral plexuses, any of the nerve trunks 
derived from these, branches of the upper cervical nerves, and 
occasionally the anterior crural (femoral) nerve. 

Symptomatology. — Common to all cases of interstitial 
neuritis, irrespective of their topography, is a relatively acute 
onset of (1) severe pain radiating along the course of the nerve. 
This may be of great intensity and is described as “ burning,” 
“ stabbing,” or “ boring.” It occurs in severe accesses with 
an aching pain of lesser intensity between the paroxysms. 
Movement, cold, and sometimes the warmth and immobility 
of the limb associated with sleep may provoke pain. (2) The 
affected trunk or plexus is extremely painful on pressure and 
on stretching. (3) The muscles supplied by the nerve are 
painful and very tender to pressure, on stretching, and on 
active contraction. They may show fibrillation and a slight 
degree of wasting, but in the majority of cases there is no true 
weakness. (4) In the distribution of the cutaneous branches 
of the nerve, burning pains, hyperaesthesia, and various 
parsesthesiae are usual ; objective sensory loss is. exceptional. 
(6) In the early acute stage the tendon jerks of the affected 
muscles are increased, but may later become diminished, as 
in the case of the auikle jerk in severe sciatic neuritis. 

Tlie following special varieties of interstitial neuritis may 
be briefly described. 

Sciatica and Sciatic Nkitkitis 

These two terms are applied to a single condition, namely, 
interstitial neuritis of the sciatic nerve or of the nerve trun^ 
entering into its formation. A symptomatic ” sciatica may 
result £rom pressure on these nerve trunks by new growths, 
but is accompanied by more severe objective disturbances than 
true sciatica. The onset of sciatica may be acute or subacute, 
and may follow lumbago. It is a disease of early and middle 
adult life, is most fr^uent in males, and an attack may 
be precipitated by trauma, fatigue, or exposure to cold. Fre- 
quently there is no discoverable imm ediate factor of this nature. 

The symptoms are very characteristic, and consist in pain 
along the course and distribution of the nerve, from pelvis to 
lower extremity. The nerve trunk and its branches are tender 
on palpation, and pain is produced on stretching the nerve by 



956 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

flexing the extended leg at the hip. The muscles supplied by 
the nerve are extremely tender to pressure and to stretching, 
and also on contraction. They may fibrillate and show a 
slight degree of wasting. In rare cases there may be weakness 
of the dorsiflexor group of muscles of a degree leading to 
footdrop. There are often parsesthesise over the cutaneous 
distribution of the nerve, that is, over the outer side of the 
1^ and the dorsum of the foot and the sole. Diminution or 
ab^noe of the ankle jerk is often seen in severe cases, the other 
tendon reflexes in the two lower limbs being notably brisk. 
When standing, the subject rests the body weight on the sound 
limb and holds the painful limb slightly flexed at hip and knee, 
adducted and rotated in and with the heel raised from the 
ground. A compensatory scoliosis accompanies the tilting of 
the pelvis necessitated by this posture of the leg. 

In favourable cases the pain is most severe at the onset 
and gradually diminishes with rest, recovery taking place 
in from four to eight weeks. In other cases pain tends to 
persist and the condition to become chronic and subject to 
exacerbations in succeeding winters. Second and third attacks 
occur, but are not usual. 

Diagnosis. — Few conditions are more frequently diagnosed 
on inadequate grounds than sciatica, though few have more 
clearly defined and readily recognisable physical signs. Osteo- 
arthritis of the hip-joint is the condition in which this error 
is most commonly made, though the presence of limitation of 
the range of passive movement at the hip and of pain in the 
joint on full adduction or abduction, and the absence of the 
special signs of sciatica should make differentiation possible. 
Sacro-iliac disease may also be confused with sciatica if the 
signs of the latter be not looked for. In aU joint conditions 
radiography frequently, but not invariably, reveals the presence 
of arthritis. The symptoms of sciatic neuritis when associated 
with cachexia and with marked weakness, wasting, or sensory 
loss in the distribution of the nerve, or with indications of a 
bilateral sciatic nerve affection, should alwa 3^8 arouse the 
suspicion of pressure from new growth, and pelvic examination 
should be m^e. 

Treatment. — In all cases of sciatica, both those with acute 
and severe onset and those that develop subacutely, an 
immediate retirement to bed is essential. The longer this is 
delayed, the longer the duration of the malady and the less 
responsive it becomes to subsequent treatment. The period 
of such rest will depend upon the severity of the s^ptoms, 
but several days complete freedom from pain and discoinfort 



HERNIATION OP THE NUCLEUS PULPOSUS 957 

should be obtained before the patient is allowed to move 
about. Unless this step be taken no form of local treatment 
can be expected to afford relief. Radiant heat and hot 
applications to the limb give relief from pain. Diathermy in 
skilled hands is sometimes of use in the later stages of the 
affection, but given too early may aggravate the pain and 
muscular tenderness. This caution applies also to the use of 
massage, which indeed plays a secondary role in treatment. 

As regards drugs, the combination of aspirin with phenacetin 
(5 gr. of each) is a valuable one, but in the intense pain of the 
initial stage morphia is occasionaUy necessary as a temporary 
measure. When severe pain has passed, passive movement 
and massage to the affected limb are useful. The immobilisation 
of the patient in a plaster splint, or by means of a long Liston 
splint, for from two to six weeks has been successfully employed 
in intractable cases. 

Psychoneurotic symptoms are not infrequently grafted on 
to the clinical picture of chronic sciatica, and pain and a limping 
gait may be complained of for months after objective signs of 
the malady have passed. In this connection, it is of interest to 
remember that once the ankle jerk has become diminished it 
may never regain its former briskness. Therefore a diminished 
anlde jerk is not necessarily evidence of active sciatica. 

Herniation of the Nucleus Pulposus (Protrusion of 

THE iNTERVERTEBRAIi DiSC) 

In an imoertain proportion of what appear to be cases of 
chronic sciatic pain it has recently been found that there is a 
protrusion of the intervertebral disc into the lumen of the spinal 
canal. Pathologically the lesion is a herniation of the nucleus 
pulposus of the disc, and setiologically trauma is responsible 
for the herniation. The type of injury in question is usually 
a sudden strain due to the effort of lifting some heavy object 
while in a stooping or asymmetrical posture. The discs involved 
are in 90 per cent, of cases those between the fourth and fifth 
lumbar or the fifth lumbcur and first sacral vertebrae. 

The diagnosis of herniation of the nucleus pulposus is now 
being made with somewhat undue ifrequency and often 
upon clinically inadequate grounds. Since this diagnosis 
often involves laminectomy, it is clearly very important that 
it should be made only upon conclusive groimds, for this pro- 
cedure may be follow^ by persistent and disabling symptoms 
unless expertly perfonned. 

Clinically the symptom-complex of herniation of either of 



968 DISEASES OF THE NEBVOUS SYSTEM 

the two discs named is as follows : There is a long history of 
chronic, disabling pain low in the back, which precedes by 
months or years the appearance of pain in the leg of sciatic 
distribution. The latter pain is characteristically aggravated 
by coughing, sneezing, or straining. There are parsesthesue 
(tingling, numbness, cold sensations) on the outer side of the 
leg below the knees, or over the foot. The lumbar spine is 
stiff, and stretching the sciatic nerve by elevating the extended 
1^ as the patient lies supine increases both pain and par- 
ffisthesise. There may be some tilting of the iliac crest on the 
side of the lesion with spasm is the erector spinse. The ankle 
jerk is often abolished. Paralysis or weakness of muscles is 
exceptional. Over the parsesthetio areas of skin there may be 
some objective blunting of sensation. 

In the absence of these signs and symptoms the diagnosis 
is rarely justified. In any case an adequate period of rest and 
the use of the measures adopted when the diagnosis of sciatica 
is made should be an invariable preliminary both to the final 
diagnosis and to the treatment of herniation of the nucleus 
pulposus. Operative procedures less drastic than laminectomy 
are in course of development for the removal of fragments of 
herniated disc and in the meantime it should be emphasised 
that laminectomy should not be lightly undertaken, or recom- 
mended, save at the hands of the experienced neuro-surgeon. 
An unskilled laminectomy is a severe trauma that may have 
disabling sequels for patients likely to be engaged in laborious 
work. 


Brachiai, Neubitis 

This is a common form of interstitial neuritis in adults 
of both sexes. The onset may be apparently spontaneous, or 
may be precipitated by strain or cold. It is subacute, pain 
appearing and increasing rapidly in intensity. At first pain is 
referred to the root of the neck over the brachial plexus ; it 
then spreads down the limb to the hand. There are frequently 
foci of intense pain limited to small areas on the lateral side of 
the upper arm or in the palm. In character the pain is con- 
stant but subject to paroxysmal exacerbations, which are 
described as “ stabbing,” “ burning,” or ” boring.” The 
subject c^moi lie on the shoulder of the affected side in bed, 
and when standing the pain is aggravated if the limb be allowed 
to bang free from tbe shoulder. Examination of the Kmb 
reveals physical signs of the nature mentioned above but 
rarely is there any definite weakness or objective sensory loss. 



NEUROMA 


959 


However, the brachial neuritis, which may on rare occasions 
develop as part of a serum reaction after administration of 
anti-tetanic serum, is usually characterised by marked paralysis 
of deltoid, biceps, brachio-radialis, and the scapular muscles. 
The tendon reflexes are commonly increased in the ordinary 
cases of this condition. 

Course. — Under favourable conditions of treatment the 
acute process may die down in from three to six weeks, but 
may, on the other hand, prove very intractable to all forms 
of treatment and persist for months with varying intensity 
of pain. Usually recovery takes place sooner than in the 
case of sciatica. 

Diagnosis. — Arthritis of the shoulder, cervical spondylitis, 
and cervical rib may produce pain of comparable distribution 
and intensity, but the nerve trunk tenderness of neuritis is 
absent from these conditions, which present their own 
characteristic signs. 

Treatment. — ^The limb must be kept at rest and supported 
by a sling. It may be advisable to put the patient to bed. 
Radiant heat and other forms of local heat give relief from 
pain. Aspirin combined with phenacetin in 5-gr. doses of each 
are also useful for this purpose. After the first period, massage 
and diathermy may be employed. Diathermy exerts its 
beneficial effect in virtue of the beat generated in the tissues 
through which the current passes, and for no other reason, 
and the relief of pain thus produced is the most valuable effect 
of this form of high-frequency current. 

Cervico-occipital Nenritis. — The pain radiates over the 
distribution of the upper cervical and great occipital nerves. 
There may be associated fibrositis of the neck muscles and 
some spondylitis of the cervical spine. 

For all these forms of interstitial neuritis the principles of 
treatment laid down for sciatica apply. 


NEUROMA 

The nerves may be the seat of tumours which are known 
as neuromata. In the true neuroma, or ganglioneuroma, nerve 
fibres and ganglion cells form part of the structure of the 
tumour. This rare form of neuroma is found only in connection 
with the sympathetic nervous system in the thoracic or 
abdominal cavities. The false neuroma, or neurofibroma, is 
not uncommon. It arises in the connective tissue of the 
nerve and may be central, separating the nerve fibre bundles 



960 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


or situated at the side of the nerve trunk. It may be the seat 
of cystic or myxomatous degeneration. Neurofibromata may 
be single or multiple, and in the latter case the tumours may 
be confined to a single nerve or nerve plexus, or be widely 
diffused. In size they vary from tiny nodiiles to large masses 
of several inches diameter. They are congenital, of unknown 
origin, and may be found in epileptic or mentally defective 
subjects. It is the solitary fibroneuroma which is \isually 
responsible for symptoms, and these consist in pain along the 
course of the nerve, and also, though rarely, in objective 
sensory and motor symptoms. In mtiUiple neurofibromatosia 
innumerable tumours of soft consistence stud all the peripheral 
nerves. Occurring on cranial or spinal nerve roots they 
may produce compression symptoms. Neurofibroma on the 
auditory nerve forms the so-called acoustic tumour, or tumour 
of the ponto-cerebellar angle. 

When multiple neurofibromatosis is associated with 
cutaneous pigmentation and the presence of multiple sessile 
and pedunculated tumours on the skin, the condition is known 
as von Recklinghausen's Disease or MoUuscum fibrosum. 

Tvhercvla dolorosa is the name given to collections of tiny 
neurofibromata situated on the terminal twigs of cutaneous 
nerves, and giving rise to considerable tenderness and pain. 

All these forms of tumours on nerves tend to be progressive, 
but do not call for treatment unless pain, or, in the case of 
tumours within the skull and vertebral canal, signs of com- 
pression of adjacent structures occur. In these circumstances 
the offending tumour may be removed when possible. 


AFFECTIONS OF THE SPINAL NERVES 
Genkbal Obskbvations on Pebifhbbax. Nbbvb Lesions 

The symptoms of a peripheral nerve lesion may be of 
one of the following four types ; (a) complete interruption ; 
(b) compression with partial interruption ; (c) partial inter- 
ruption with signs of irritation ; and (d) partial interruption 
with signs of regeneration. 

The majority of cases of isolated affectimi of one or more 
peripheral nerves are taraumatic in origin, at least in those 
cases where there is severe interference with conduction, 
and partial interruption is on the whole more common than 
complete intraruption. The following clinical criteria are of 
value in differentiating the four syndromes' given above. 

Jn Complete Inierruption there is total paralysis of all 



AFFECTIONS OF THE SPINAL NERVES 961 

muscles exclusively supplied by the nerve. These muscles 
waste rapidly and profoundly, and, for a period of some weeks 
beginning from al^ut the third week after interruption has 
occurred, show the reaction of degeneration. The essential 
elements of this reaction are a loss of faradic excitability, an 
increased and altered galvanic excitability. The threshold of 
effective stimulation by the continuous current may be lowered, 
and the resulting contraction is slowed and tends to pass as a 
wave down the stimulated muscle firom one electrode to the 
other. The polar alteration so commonly described as part of 
the reaction of degeneration is an inconstant and unimportant 
thing. The significance of this reaction is that the muscle 
which shows it is completely denervated for the time being. 
Such a muscle when tapped with a percussion hammer responds 
by the same slow, wave-like type of contraction as is seen 
on using the galvanic or continuous current, and by careful 
tapping in this way as much information may be obtained as 
by electrical testing, and with considerably less difficulty. 

The paralysed and wasted muscles are painless to pressure, 
tactile sensibility being lost over a wider area than is pain sense. 
The area of sensory change is maximal for the nerve affected. 
Pressure on the nerve below the level of the lesion does not 
produce a tingling sensation in the cutaneous distribution of 
the nerve. . 

In Compression toiih Partial hiierrupiion , — The muscles 
supplied by the nerve may not be completely paralysed, though 
they generally show some wasting. They are usually very 
tender on pressure or on stretching. This is especially the 
case with muscles supplied by the internal popliteal division 
of the sciatic nerve and those supplied by the median nerve. 
In minimal lesions of the nerve ^lis tenderness may be more 
prominent than weakness, and may constitute a graver 
disability on account of the pain produced by voluntary 
contraction. As in complete interruption the tendon jerk of 
any muscle affected is usually lost. The electrical reactions 
may show no qualitative alteration. The area of sensory 
change may be less than the complete distribution of the nerve 
concerned. There is usually a small area of total pain and 
temperature loss surrounded by a larger area of complete 
tactile loss, within which there is qualitatively altered sensation 
to pain and temperature. Pinprick is peculiarly painful and 
dif^e in the sensation it evokes within this area. This 
alteration cannot be described as representing protopathic 
sensibility. The hypothesis which postulates epioritio and 
protopathic forms of cutaneous sensibility is no longer 

6i 



962 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

generally accepted, and the genesis of these forms of altered 
sensibility is obscure. 

Partial Interruption with Sigm of Irritation , — This syndrome 
is always the result of partial division by a wound, or of the 
involvement of an intact nerve trunk in cicatricial tissue from 
an adjacent wound. The greatest degree of irritation is seen 
in median and internal popliteal nerve lesions. The irritation 
varies in degree from slight pain and cutaneous hyperacsthesia 
with muscle tenderness to excruciating burning pain in the 
affected region and severe trophic lesions. The signs of 
interruption of conduction may be trivial. The most severe 
type is tliat associated with causalgia, a form of pain which 
may be of intense severity, and when long lasting reduces the 
sufferer to a pitiable state. The pain is aggravated by any 
movement, active or passive of the part, or by a jarring of the 
bed on which the patient lies ; the pain is mainly superficial. 
This clinical picture is commonly the result of gunshot wounds 
which have just glanced the nerve without severing any or 
many fibres. Motor signs of irritation are contracture and 
fibrous jnfiltration of muscles, muscular spasms and, rarely, 
actual hypertrophy of muscle. 

Sign^s of Regeneration are both motor and sensory. On the 
motor side the pilomotor muscles in the affected cutaneous 
area regain function and the limb muscles regain tone before 
voluntary power returns. On the sensory side percussion of 
the neiwe below the lesion elicits a tingling sensation within 
the skin area wdiich is the seat of sensory loss. All forms of 
cutaneous sensibility begin to return together, first at the 
proximal end of the anaesthetic area, but sensations elicited by 
stimuli here are referred to the distal end of the anaesthetic 
area (“ peripheral reference ”). Gradually the area of sensory 
change lessens in size, beginning to recjede at the proximal 
end. Thermal and painful sensations are apt to intensified 
and to be badly localised. 

The electrical reactions also begin to return to normal, 
and trophic lesions to clear up. 


LESIONS OF THE BRACHIAL PLEXUS AND OF 
NERVES DERIVED FROM IT 

The brachial plexus is derived from the lower four cervical 
and the first thoracic spinal nerve roots. These roots are 
purely morphological in the arrangement of their nerve fibres, 
whereas the nerve trunks issuing from the plexus distally are 



LESIONS OP THE BRACHIAL PLEXUS 963 

physiologically arranged, flexor muscles being supplied by one 
nerve, extensors by another. The function of the plexus is to 
effect this rearrangement, and it follows that the topography 
of the sensory and motor paralyses in plexus lesions will depend 
upon the situation of the lesion. There are thus three possible 
types of plexus lesion : radicular lesions involving the roots 
entering into the plexus, plexus lesions involving the trunks 
and cords, and distal lesions which correspond to combined 
lesions of the peripheral nerves. 

Radicular Lesions form the majority of cases, and fall 
into two groups : (a) upper plexus type, in which the 

fifth and sixth cervical roots are concerned ; and (6) lower 
plexus type, in which the eighth cervical and first thoracic 
roots are concerned. (a) The muscles supplied by the 
fifth and sixth roots and affected in lesions of these roots 
are the deltoid, biceps, brachialis anticus, supinator longus 
(brachio-radialis), supra- and infra-spinatus, serratus magnus 
(S. anterior), rhomboids, clavicular part of pectorahs major 
and Bubscapularis. The sensory loss involves the outer 
asj)ect of the shoulder and upper limb ; biceps and supinator 
jerks may be lost. (6) The eighth cervical and first thoracic 
roots supply the flexor muscles in the forearm and the small 
hand muscles. The sensory change includes the ulnar aspect 
of forearm and hand. There may be an associated cervical 
sympathetic paralysis in first thoracic root lesions. Lesions of 
the trunks and coi^s of the plexus are not so common as those 
of the roots or of the upper trunk formed by the junction of 
the fifth and sixth cervical roots. Occasionally, also, in gun- 
shot and stab wounds the posterior cord of the plexus may 
be injured, giving rise to sensory and motor symptoms in 
the distribution of the circumflex and musculo -spiral (radial) 
nerves. 

Aitiology ol Brachial Plexus Lesions. — ^The majority of 
plexus lesions are traumatic in origin and arise from the violent 
forcing of the shoulder and arm into abnormal positions. 
Thus, traction on the arm, falls on the shoulder, or pressure 
exerted on the shoulder from above may tear the upper plexus 
roots either at their points of attachment to the cord or in the 
intervertebral foramina. In forced adduction of the shoulder 
the clavicle may be forced backwards, and may compress the 
plexus against the first rib. The familiar type of birth palsy 
involves the fifth and sixth roots or the trunk formed by 
their union, and results from force exerted on the arm when 
this does not present normally. 

Upper plexus lesions form the majority of cases, and the 



964 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

lower plexus type is relatively uncommon, except when 
associated with a lesion of the upper plexus. 

Apart from trauma, the nerve roots entering into the plexus 
may be involved within the meninges by tumours or by 
syphilitic or tuberculous inflammatory processes ; within the 
vertebral foramina by arthritic changes, by tuberculous caries 
or by new growth ; in the neck by new growth or by gunshot 
or stab wounds. The production of plexus injury by cervical or 
first thoracic ribs is dealt with below. 

Symptomatology. — In upper plexus lesions there is both 
weakness and wasting of the affect^ muscles, deltoid and biceps 
being usually the most severely affected and showing a reaction 
of degeneration. The arm hangs adducted with the forearm 
pronated. It cannot be abduct^ nor can the elbow be flexed. 
The extent and degree of sensory loss is very variable. In 
slight injuries one or more of the muscles innervated by the 
damaged roots may escape. In lower plexus lesions there is 
weakness and wasting of the hand muscles, and oculo-pupillary 
(cervical sympathetic) symptoms when the first thoracic root 
is injured near its point of origin from the cord. 

^^atment. — The processes of repair which follow severe 
injiuies to the plexus and include fibrosis and matting of the 
nerve trunks render surgical treatment • out of the question 
in all but exceptional cases. The treatment of paralysed 
muscles must be carried out on the lines laid down in the 
section dealing with “ Acute Poliomyelitis ” (p. 849), and 
pain when present may be treated by radiant heat and 
suitable drugs. 

Obstetric Paralyses ot the Brachial Plexus. — As has been 
mentioned, these are more commonly of upper than of lower 
plexus type. They usually arise in head presentations when 
the shoulder is delayed or the arm extendi, and when these 
structmes are manipulated or pulled upon. Traction on the 
arm or forcible lateral flexion of the neck may tear the roots 
either at their attachment to the cord or in the intervertebral 
foramina. In a typical birth palsy the muscles paralysed are 
deltoid, biceps, bracbiaUs anticus, supinator longus and brevis 
(brachio-radialis and supinator), and infraspinatus. The 
humerus is rotated inwards, the forearm extended, and the 
hand pronated. Usually there are no sensory phenomena. 
Less commonly a lower plexus paralysis with signs of cervical 
sympathetic involvement occurs. Associated complications 
may be fractured clavicle and humerus, dislocation of the 
shoulder, and hemorrhage into the stemomastoid. 

Progno»i «. — ^Unless recovery takes place rapidly uid becomes 



LESIONS OF THE BRACHIAL PLEXUS 966 

complete within a few weeks, improvement is likely to be slow 
and recovery incomplete. 

Treatment. — The arm should be fixed in an abduction splint 
in severe cases for a short time, and subsequently the use of 
the arm should be encouraged by bandaging the normal arm 
to the side for short periods. Massage may be of some value. 
The slight cases recover without treatment. 

Rib Pressure on the Beachiae Plexus ; Cervical Rib 

Certain anatomical variations occur in the segmental 
derivation of the brachial plexus. Thus the plexus may receive 
a large quota of fibres from the fourth cervical root and an 
unduly small one or none from the first thoracic root. Such a 
plexus is said to be prefixed. On the other hand, less commonly, 
the fifth cervical quota is small, and a large quota from the 
second thoracic root is present. Such a plexus is said to be 
post-fixed. The development of the costal elements of the 
vertebrae follows that of the plexus, so that with a prefixed 
plexus a supernumerary rib may develop from the seventh 
cervical vertebra, while a post-fixed plexus may interfere with 
the development of the normal first thoracic rib, which then 
retains a rudimentary form. When the adjustment between 
plexus and ribs is perfect, no abnormal pressure is exerted on 
the roots, but when the development of the costal process is in 
excess of the plexus alteration, the lowest nerve root in the 
plexus may be stretched over the costal element, and symptoms 
of neuritis and damage arise. Thus a cervical rib may stretch 
the seventh and eighth cervical roots, or a rudimentary first 
thoracic rib may similarly affect the first thoracic root. The 
follow ing types of rudimentary rib oqcut : (1) an exaggerated 
costal process of the seventh cervical vertebra which is prolonged 
forw^ards and downwards as a fibrous band, to be attached to 
the first rib ; (2) a short rib articulated at its origin and 
continued as above ; (3) a long jointed cervical rib attached 
by a fibrous band to the normal first rib ; (4) a cervical rib 
articulated at each end, anteriorly with the first rib ; (5) a 
rudimentary first thoracic rib attached to the stemiun by a 
fibrous band. The first and last of these forms are not really 
visible in a radiogram, but may yet be responsible for plexus 
pressure. 

Whether the injury to the nerve root is caused by the bony 
or the fibrous part of i\w rib dejiends ujk)!! the length of the 
former. 

JRlolagy. -Wliile supernumerary ribs are usually bilateral, 



966 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


though not invariably symmetrical, pressure symptoms are 
commonly unilateral and do not develop until adult life, 
generally in the third or fourth decade. The common factor 
in the various immediate causes of symptoms is a lowering of 
the shoulder girdle, with a resulting increase in tension on the 
root stretched by the rib. Such causes are muscular hypotonia 
after confinement or in debilitated states, a degree of manual 
activity unusual for the subject, strains, and repeated traction 
on the arm. Women, in whom the shoulder girdles normally 
lie somewhat lower than in men, form the majority of 
cases. 

Symptomatology. — This may be entirely or largely sub- 
jective, or there may be muscular atrophy, sensory loss, and 
vasomotor changes in the limb. The initial sjTuptoms are 
pain and paraesthesiae. Both symptoms tend to be maximal 
in the hand, but vary greatly in distribution and intensity 
fiom case to case. Usually the pain radiates down the fore- 
arm into the hand and digits ; it is aggravated by anything 
which depresses the shoulder girdle, such as carrying a parcel 
or wearing a heavy coat, and is relieved by elevating the 
shoulder girdle. It may come on with great intensity while 
the patient is in bed. These subjective symptoms may persist 
for many months without the development of any objective 
motor or sensory changes. When muscular wasting appears, 
it conforms to one of two types ; a median type with a selective 
incidence of wasting in abductor pollicis brevis and opponens 
pollicis alone. The thenar eminence then is flattened in its 
radial half, the shaft of the metacarpal bone becomes sub- 
cutaneous, while the other thenar muscles escape. This type 
of wasting is pathognomonic of cervical rib pressure. The 
other type of muscular atrophy corresponds to an ulnar 
distribution, the wasted muscles being the interossei, and 
the hand tends to assume the “ main en griffe ” fwsture. 
Sensory changes are variable and inconstant*; they may be 
on the radial or the ulnar side of the arm, the former in thenar 
atrophy and the latter in tlie ulnar type. There is a clinical 
type in which vasomotor symptoms predominate. These 
consist of redness, cyanosis or cedema of the band, with 
subjective sensations of heat or cold. The radial pulse may 
be smaller than on the normal side in those rare cases where 
the subclavian artery is raised over the rib. In rare eases of 
this kind blood clot may form in the subclavian artery, and 
embolism occur distally, blocking the artery in the arm at its 
bifurcation at the eJlKm% or one of ita distal branches. In these 
circumstances gangrene may develop in one or more finger 



LESIONS OF THE BRACHIAL PLEXUS 967 

tips. When this happens it is likely to be in a case which 
presents no signs of nerve pressure. The other vasomotor signs, 
however, are probably due to pressure on sympathetic fibres 
in the eighth cervical root. 

Diagnosis. — ^The presence of long-continued pain and 
paraesthesise in one arm, especially in a woman, when 
associated with vasomotor changes, should lead to a suspicion 
of cervical rib and to an X-ray examination of the neck. 
Muscular atrophy may be considerably delayed in many cases, 
and appear after only long months of pain. A history of 
factors which relieve or aggravate pain is of importance for 
the reasons given above. When atrophy is present the con- 
dition has to bo differentiated from progressive muscular 
atrophy and lesions of the lower cervical enlargement of the 
cord. In these the small hand muscle wasting is global, and 
rarely selective as in the thenar type of wasting described. 
Moreover, some degree of involvement of the second hand 
develops sooner or later in both these conditions. 

Diagnosis presents greatest difficulties when radiograms 
yield no definite information, as may be the case with a 
fibrous “ rib,” and no objective motor or sensory symptoms 
are present. In these circumstances a careful historj" vill 
generally suffice to distinguish rib pressure from brachial 
neuritis. 

Treatment. — When there is no muscular atrophy and pain 
is the prciminent symptom, complete relief may be obtained by 
measures which tend to raise the normal level of the shoulder 
girdle. At first the arm may be carried in a sling, and then 
massage and remedial exercises designed to raise the tone and 
power in the girdle muscles should be carried out. General 
tonic treatment and careful attention to the patient’s nutrition 
and amount of exercise are important. Pain may be relieved 
by the use of aspirin, phenacetin, and allied drugs. 

When muscular atrophy is present it is doubtful if any 
treatment short of surgical removal of the rib is adequate, and 
in some cases where pain persists in spite of the measures 
described above, removal may be necessary. 

Thk Phkenic Nerve. — Paralysis of this nerve is uncommon, 
but when present may be due to lesions of its ctdls of origin in 
the third, fourth, and fifth cervical segments of the cord 
(poliomyelitis, motor neurone disease, compression) ; to leaions 
of its roots (vertebral disease, meningitis) or to lesions of the 
nerve in neck or thorax, where it is occasionally involved in 
new growths or inflammatory processes. The symptom is 
paralysis of the diaphragm. VVhen unilateral tliis may be 



968 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

difiBioult to detect apart from radiosoopio screening. When 
bilateral there is slight dyspnoea on exertion, and bulging of 
the abdominal wall on inspiration. 

When associated with paralysis of other respiratory muscles, 
the danger of death from asphyxia is considerable, u^ess some 
function is rapidly restored. 

The Circumflex Nerve. — ^The nerve may be damaged in 
injuries to the shoulder, or be affected by a toxic parenchymatous 
neuritis. The symptom is paralysis of the deltoid, with or 
without sensory loss in the skin covering the lateral aspect of 
this muscle. In complete lesions the deltoid wastes rapidly 
and profoimdly, and recovery is generally delayed and imperfect. 
The arm cannot be abducted, and forward and backward 
movements of the arm are weakened. Arthritic changes in 
the shoulder-joint may occur in permanent paralysis of the 
muscle. 

The Long Thoracic Nerve (nerve to serratus anterior). — 
This nerve innervates serratus magnus. It may be damaged 
in injuries to the shoulder region by excessive strain, as in 
carrying weights or in keeping the arm elevated and out- 
stretch^ unduly. 

It is not infrequently affected alone by toxic processes 
(after diphtheria, typhoid, influenza, and other infections). 
There is often some associated paralysis of the middle or lower 
part of trapezius. The normal function of the serratus magnus 
is to draw the scapula upwards, forwards, and outwards, and 
to advance the point of the shoulder. When paralysed, 
elevation of the arm is slightly weakened, and when the arm 
is advanced to the horizontal, the vertebral (medial) border 
of the scapula stands out from the thorax and is said to be 
“ winged.” 

Tm Musculospiral (Radial) Nerve. — Owing to its long 
and exposed course this is the most frequently injmed bttuioh 
of the brachial plexus. The majority of lesions are traumatic, 
the nerve being damaged as it passes round the outer side of the 
arm. Simple compression is the commonest form of injury, 
the arm b^g pressed against something hard, or compressed 
by a tourniquet. It is rare for the nerve of a perfectly healthy 
subject to sustain damage in this way, the majority of the 
patients being chronic alcoholics whose peripheral nerves are 
already poisoned. Other predisposing factors are debility, 
clironic plumbism, and recent infections such as typhoid. 
Other forms of injury are the involvement of the nerve in 
fracture of the shaft of the humerus, and pressure on the 
nerve in the axilla by a crutch. 



LESIONS OF THE BRACHIAL PLEXUS 969 


Symptomatology , — ^This varies according to whether the 
nerve is damaged distal to the offset of the branch to the 
triceps or not. In the former case triceps and anconeus escape, 
and the supinators, extensors of the hand and of the fingers, 
and the extensors and long abductor of the thumb are paralysed. 
There is wrist-drop, and the wrist and digits cannot be extended, 
except that the interossei maintain extension of the distal and 
middle phalanges. The grasp is weakened owing to the fiexion 
at the wrist which accompanies it, and which is due to* loss of 
the S3Tiergio fixation of the wrist that is part of the complete 
movement of grasping. Supination of the forearm is lost, 
except when the biceps is contracting and the elbow flexing. 
In crutch paralysis the triceps is involved also. Sensory loss 
is inconstant, but when present occurs over the radial half of 
the dorsum of the hand and over the proximal segments of the 
thumb, index, and middle fingers. 

Prognosis and Treatment . — Recovery is the rule except in 
severe crushing of the nerve in association with fracture. 
Slight pressure palsy recovers rapidly without special treatment, 
but in severer cases where the muscles show a reaction of 
degeneration, recovery is delayed. The essential part of treat- 
ment is the placing of the paralysed muscles in the position of 
physiological rest, that is, moderately shortened. This is done 
by the use of an anterior forearm and hand splint, which keeps 
the wrist and digits slightly extended. Active exercises should 
be carried out daily, care being taken to prevent full extension 
of the paretic muscles. 

The Median Nerve. — Isolated paralysis of the median 
nerve is not common, and is generally traumatic in origin. 
It may be affected with other nerves in compression of the 
limb. Slight median nerve paralysis associated with inter- 
stitial neuritis is sometimes found in hand workers (joiners, 
locksmiths, ironers, etc.). Toxic parenchymatous neuritis of 
the nerve occasionally occurs in association with various 
infections. 

Symptomatology . — When the nerve is damaged in the upper 
arm the following muscles are affected : flexor carpi radialis, 
flexor sublimis, and part of flexor profundus digitorum, the 
pronators, flexor longus pollicis, opponens pollids, abductor 
brevis pollicis and flexor brevis polUcis, and the lateral two 
lumbrical muscles. The full extent of sensory change includes 
the palm of tlie hand radial to a line drawn along the long axis 
of the limb down the middle of the ring finger, and also the 
padmar aspect of the digits and thumb. On the dorsum it 
includes the distal portions of the same digits. In incomplete 



970 


DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


lesions a less extensive area of altered sensibility may be present. 
In addition to these objective motor and sensory phenomena, 
in incomplete lesions of the nerve there may be marked 
tenderness of the paretic muscles, severe pain in the distribution 
of the nerve, the so-called “ causalgia,” and trophic changes 
in the skin and nails of the affected area. Thus the nails may 
be rounded and furrowed, and the skin shiny and atrophic. 

Prognosis and TrmtmmL — The prospects of recovery in 
severe lesions is by no means so good as in the case of the 
musculospiral nerve. In traumatic lesioi^ resection and 
resuture may be called for. 

The ITlkar Nerve. — ^This nerve is more commonly injured 
than the median. Isolated lesions are generally traumatic. 
The nerve may be crushed in fractures of the internal condyle 
(medial epicondyle) of the humerus, or may become later 
involved in callus formation after such a fracture. The paralysis 
of the nerve in the latter case is gradual and may bc' long 
delayed. The nerve may lie exposed to repeated minor 
injuries, as it lies behind the condyle, and develop a neuritis 
vith paralytic symptoms. An isolated toxic neuritis of the 
nerve occasionally follows some infection. 

Symptofnaiology , — Ulnar nerve j>aralysis is j>eculiarly dis- 
abling to the hand owing to the paralysis of the interossei. 
The thumb cannot l>e adducted and the little finger is almost 
immobilised. The fingers cannot he flexed at the metacarjK)- 
phalangeal joints or extended at the di.stal joints, thougii in 
this respect the index and ring fingers an‘ less disabled than 
the remaining digits. Gradually, the “ claw hand ’’ is pro- 
duced by the overaction of op{x>nents of the interosscu ; the 
fingers are hyperextended at the proximal and flexed at 
the distal joints. The hypothenar eminence disappears and 
the mesial part of the thenar eminence. 


LESIONS OF THE LUMBAR AND SACRAL PLEXUSES 

The lumbar and sacral plexuses and the peripheral nerves 
of the lower limbs are much less frequently affected than the 
plexus and nerves of the uppc^r limb. Isolateil paralyses of 
anterior crural (femoral) or obturator nerves are rare, and while 
the sciatic nerve is more frequently the seat of disease, it is 
rarely compliitely paralysed apart from gunshot wounds. 

The Schatic NuRVB.—The nerve trunk, or the roots which 
enter into its formathm, may l>e involved by tumours of the 
sacrum or in the pelvis, or by a syphilitic ra^lieulitis. Tim 



LESIONS OF LUMBAR AND SACRAL PLEXUSES 971 

nerve is commonly the seat of an interstitial neuritis which 
is the pathological process responsible for sciatica, a condition 
which has already been described (p. 955). 

In damage to the nerve from pelvic lesions, tumours or 
compression exerted by the foetal head in pregnant women, it 
is the peroneal division of the nerve which bears the brunt of 
the damage. The symptoms of a lesion of the peroneal {lateral 
popliteal) division in this situation are : paralysis or paresis of 
the dorsiflexoi^of the foot and toes, of the peronei, with sensory 
loss over the outer aspect of the leg and over the dorsum of 
the foot. The foot hangs down in the equinovarus position, 
and cannot be dorsiflexed or everted. Secondary shortening of 
the calf muscles may render the foot-drop a permanent 
disability. 

The Peroneal Nerve. — Special emphasis should be laid 
upon the isolated affection of this nerve since it is not uncommon. 
It may occur in otherwise healthy adults quite apart from 
discoverable local injury. In these circumstances its aetiology 
is unknown. Its appearance is often preceded by pain along 
the outer side of the leg. After this has been present for two 
or three days a sudden paralysis, usually severe in degree, of 
all the muscles supplied by the nerve is seen. The foot hangs 
loosely down in the position of equino- varus. The patient can 
stand on tiptoe, but he cannot dorsiflex the foot and he cannot 
run. There is sensory loss of varying degree over the outer 
asjKH’t of the leg and on the dorsum of the foot to the base of 
the tO€w. After some weeks a degree of wasting of the affected 
muscles makes its appearance, but is rarely profound. Recovery 
is very slow and frequently incomplete. Among the special 
circumstances in which this nerve may be paralysed are com- 
pression of the nerve trunk by a gaiter or a bandage round 
the upper end of the fibula where the nerve winds round the 
bone. In diabetos, and occasionally in typhoid, tliis nerve 
may be the seat of a neuritis. Treatment consists in the wear- 
ing of a foot-drop 8upjx)rt by day and of a night shoe when 
in bed, so that the foot is constantly kept at right angles to 
the line of the leg. 

The Tibial or Medial Popliteal Nerve. — Apart from 
gunshot wounds and comjiarable injuries, isolated paralysis of 
this division of the sciatic nerve is uncommon. In complete 
lesions the symptoms are paralysis of the calf and plantar 
muscles and sensory loss over the sole of the foot and the 
posterior iisi>ect of the leg in its lower half. The atrophy of 
the plantar muscles renders the sole hollow, the proximal 
segment of the toes is hyperextended and the terminal segments 



972 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


flexed. Perforating plantar ulcers may develop when sensory 
loss is complete. 

Thb Aotbbiob Cbttbai. (Pbmobal) Nbkvb. — Paralysis of 
this nerve is very rare, and when it occurs is the result of 
pelvic injuries. The symptoms are paralysis of ilio-psoas, 
pectineus, sartorius, and quadriceps. There is loss of the knee 
jerk and weakness of extension of the knee. There may be 
sensory change on the anterior and medial aspects of the 
thigh. An uncommon malady is an interstitial neuritis of 
the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh, known as meralgia 
parcesthetica. It occurs in males, and its symptoms are pains, 
paraesthesite, and slight objective changes in sensibility in the 
territory of this nerve on the front and lateral aspect of the 
thigh. The symptoms are brought on by standing or walking. 


OCCUPATIONAL CRAMPS 

Under this heading is included a group of disabilities in 
which the characteristic symptoms are provoked by the effort 
to carry out some habitually performed muscular action, 
commonly an action by which the subject earns his liveli- 
hood. It follows that the disability appears in the muscles 
which perform this action, and ends by preventing its 
accomplisbment. The two essential symptoms are spasm 
and cramp-like pain in the affected muscles. Those who 
carry out repetitive movements with the right hand and arm 
are the subjects of the malady, such as clerks, telegraphists, 
hammermen, and sempstresses. Hence we speak of writer’s 
cramp, telegraphist’s cramp, and so on. At its onset an 
occupation cramp of this type appears only when the speoifio 
action is being carried out with a given group of muscles, but 
in severe and long-standing cases other co-ordinated movements 
performed by these muscles also come to be impeded in 
execution. Perhaps the commonest clinical type is writer’s 
cramp, and what is to be said of its aetiology', prognosis and 
treatment applies to other varieties of “ cramp.” 

Wbitbb’s Cbamf — JEtidogy . — Hitherto males have formed 
the majority of the patients, but with the entry of women into 
clerical occupations it is possible that this statement may have 
to be modiBed in due course. The patients are clerks in the 
third, fourth, or fifth decades of life. In writing there are two 
motor components, pm-hoiding and pen-moving. Faulty 
habits of pen-moving are probably imp>riant factors in the 
production of writer’s cramp, and it is this aspect of the act of 



OCCUPATIONAL CRAMPS 973 

writing which is predominantly affected. Those who perform 
the movements of the pen wholly with the thumb and index 
fingers, or from the wrist downwards, employing the arm tts 
a whole little or not at all, are throwing the greatest strain upon 
a small group of muscles, and appear to be specially liable to 
this form of occupation cramp. Shorthand writers are said to 
be immune from this disability. 

Symptoms . — ^The onset is gradual. After a spell of writing 
the subject finds the pen getting slightly out of control and 
causing slight disfigurations of his handwriting. He notices 
that he is grasping the pen with undue firmness, and that the 
hand readily tires and aches. The thumb and index gradually 
tend to go into flexion spasm and to slip up the pen, and 
he cannot freely extend these digits to move the pen up 
and down the paper. The writing becomes jerky and heavy 
from the force with which the pen is pressed upon the paper. 
Gradually the forearm muscles are invaded by spasm, and in 
course of time the writing of a few words brings the hand to a 
stop with the pen tightly grasped in the flexed thumb and 
index. At first all other hand and finger movements are 
performed with normal freedom, but gradually these also tend 
to become difficult and painful. In some patients pain is 
prominent from the outset and may remain the predominant 
symptoms throughout, cramp being minimal. 

Different methods of holding the pen give transient relief, 
but finally all devices of this kind fail and the patient becomes 
unable to write at all. Even the left hand may be invaded if 
the subject changes hands with his pen and learns to write 
left-handed. 

Course . — The sjTuptoms increase progressively xmtil the 
attempt to write is finally abandoned and the hand is rested 
for a prolonged period. Usually recurrence attends the 
subsequent resumption of writing, but not invariably. 

Diagnosis. — ^Although the symptoms of writer’s cramp are 
extremely characteristic, numerous pitfalls beset the early 
diagnosis of the condition. Any slowly progressive lesion 
involving the central nervous mechanism of movement tends to 
affect finely co-ordinated purposive movements before coarser 
or simpler movements are impaired or before there is obvious 
paresis. Therefore difficulty in writing may be simply the 
expression of such a slowly developing disorder of movement. 
Paralysis a^tans is an example of such an insidiously developing 
malady wUoh may interfere with freedom of writing before 
other disabilities are complained of, and this is especially apt 
to be the case in a professional writer. Other comparable 



974 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

organic diseases will come readily to mind in this connection, 
and the presence of these should be excluded by thorough 
investigation before a diagnosis of writer’s cramp is accepted. 
Again, any peripheral nerve affection or joint affection which 
gives rise to pain on movement of the hand or arm may impair 
the freedom and comfort of writing. Finally, any painful 
affection of the tissues of the hand should be excluded. 

Treatment , — ^Although writer’s cramp is in aU probability 
primarily due to defective methods of writing, the malady 
develops at a time when re-education in the act cannot be 
carried out. Rest is the first essential of treatment, and should 
be for not less than six months, even in the slightest cases. 
In the absence of such rest no improvement can be expected. 
The value of local treatment, such as massage or electrical 
stimulation, is uncertain. Their use encourages the patient, 
and their withholding may lead him to feel that nothing is 
being done for him. Mild galvanism and gentle massage with 
active exercises are the best forms of local treatment to allow 
in these circumstances. It is important to attend to the 
patient’s general health and nutrition. 

If the patient resume writing, the use of a broad-pointed 
nib and of a thick penholder is advisable. 

In violin and piano players, neuralgic or painful forms of 
occu|mtion neurosis are more common than muscular spasm, 
but some spasm in the fingers may be present. Treatment 
must be carried out on the lines indicated above. 


THE TICS 

A tic has been defined as ** a co-ordinated purposive act, 
provoked in the first instance by some external cause or by 
an idea ; repetition leads to its becoming habitual, and finally 
to its involuntary reproduction without cause and for no 
purpose.” There are psychical and motor components in a 
tic. The motor component may consist of sudden jerky 
co-ordinated movements endlessly repeated. This form is most 
common in children, and tends to involve the facial, laryngeal, 
pharyngeal, and upper limb muscles predominantly. This is 
Hie so-called simple tic. More complicated reactions may occur 
consisting in the repetition of some complex act. A special 
variety of motor disorder allied to the tics is spasmodic torticollis. 

In a few cases there is no obvious motor component, but 
the patient is swayed by imperative ideas and is subject to 
pericecal explosive utterances. 



THE TICS 975 

All forms occur in mentally unstable individuals, in whom 
other neuropatliic symptoms may be present. 

Simple Tic : Habit Spasm. — ^This is a malady of highly 
strung children during the second five years of life. Its onset 
may be precipitated by ill-health or debilitating factors. The 
facial muscles are commonly affected, and the child blinks, 
wrinkles its forehead, or makes any of a series of jerky grimaces. 
The arms may also be the seat of similar jerky movements. 
The disorder is increased by anxiety or emotion of any kind, can 
be controlled momentarily, and ceases during sleep. When the 
lar3mgeal musculature is affected the child may make repeated 
clicking or other sounds. The malady may persist for many 
months, and even for years. It is often associated with nail- 
biting, difficulties in feeding, and restless and disturbed sleep. 
Usually the symptoms cl6ar up entirely, but recurrent attacks 
arc not uncommon. 

Duignosis , — The disease w'ith which simple tic is most 
likely to be confused is Sydenham’s chorea. In chorea the 
movements are not repetitive, they lead to dropping of objects 
held in the affected hand, and to defects of articulation. The 
hand -grasp of the patient with chorea is irregularly sustained. 
The opjosites of all these features obtain in simple tic. 

CoNVULsrv'E Tic. — In this relatively uncommon form the 
movements have the same character as those of simple tic, but 
are much more violent and widespread, involving sometimes 
the whole musculature. Complicated and grotesque gestures 
may occur in periodical outbursts, and the patient commonly 
presents marked mental instability. 

1\SYCHICAL Tic. — In this form, although there is no muscular 
spasm in tlie strict sense of the word, the malady does find 
motor expression in repeated explosive utterances, which may 
consist of words, phrases, or sentences. The repetition of 
words heard in tliis way is spoken of as echolalia, w^hile if the 
utterances be obscene we speak of coprolalia. . Anxiety neurosis 
symptoms may be added to this picture, and definite psychotic 
symptoms may ultimately develop. 

ihreatment. — The cliild’s general health must first receive 
attention, and any adverse factors in its home and school 
environment, psychologic^ or physical, be corrected. The 
oonstant reprimands to wliich many such children are subjected 
by over-anxious parents are detrimental to recovery. Perhaps 
the most essential element in successful treatment is the wise 
management of the ohild both at work and play. It not 
infrequently happens that the patients are the children of 
unstable parents who are ill fitt^ to assist treatment in the 



976 DISEASES OP THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

required directions. Firm but kindly discipline, carefully 
gr^ed physical exercises, a nourishing dietary and, in the 
matter of drugs, the use of moderate doses of bromide will 
sufiSce to effect cure in the majority of cases. Similar 
considerations should guide treatment in the case of con- 
vulsive and psychical tics, but with these the prognosis is 
invariably bad. 

Spasmodic Torticollis. — In this condition there is irregular 
tonic and clonic spasm of the muscles which rotate the head. 
Sometimes the extensors of the neck are also involved. As a 
result the head is periodically forced into abnormal positions. 
The condition is momentarily under control, but considerable 
mental effort may be needed to restrain the spasm for more 
than a few seconds. 

Miiology , — It is a malady of adult life, and may occur in 
persons of any age from the later years of the third decade 
onwards. The sexes are equally affected. 'Commonly it arises 
without any precipitating factor which is discoverable, but 
pain from cervical spondylitis or fibrositis in the neck muscles 
may be the exciting factor in a predisposed person. Anxiety 
and worry are other exciting factors. Most of the patients 
are highly strung, emotional individuals with a neuropathic 
inheritance. Recently the view has been put forward that the 
spasm is the expression of a small lesion of the corpus striatum, 
but there is no evidence in favour of such an hyjx) thesis. It 
must be remembered that the carriage of the head in the erect 
position is a very complex and recently evolved function, and 
one, therefore, which may easily be disordered from a variety 
of causes other than focal disease in the brain. 

Symptomatology . — ^The onset is usually very gradual, the 
patient becoming slowly aware of a tendency of his he^ to 
turn to one side. At ^t he can control this, but with lapse 
of attention, and particularly under any kind of stress, the 
movement gains in frequency and force. The neck muscles are 
bilaterally involved, but on simple inspection the muscle most 
obviously in spasm is stemomastoid. The crossed trapezius is 
usually affect^ simultaneously, and as the malady progresses 
other muscles enter into spasm. With powerful action of the 
neck extensors, the head may be retract^ (retrocollic spasm), 
and associated with this is overaction of the fhintales and 
elevation of the eyebrows. This is a normal association when 
the head is thrown back voluntarily, and its presence here 
indica^ that we are dealing not with simple muscular spasm 
but with a more complex phenomenon, namely, a movement 
involving normally co-operating muscles, and probably initiated 



THE TICS 67*7 

from a high cerebral level. The spasm may be almost wholly 
tonic, or clonic exacerbations may be superimposed upon it, 
and the predominantly tonic form cannot be differentiated in 
respect of aetiology or causation from the clonic variety. In 
severe cases cramp-like pain usually accompanies the spasm, 
and the latter may be so forceful as to require considerable 
effort to overcome it passively. Hypertrophy of the stemo- 
mastoid is sometimes seen in long-standing cases. It is said 
that deviation of the head to the left is more common than 
to the right. 

Prognosis and Treatment, — Massage, abtive exercises against 
resistance, and general rest will sometimes effect a temporary 
cure. The patient may be kept flat on his back with the head 
between sand -bags for several weeks, but old or debilitated 
patients do not tolerate this immobilisation at all well. The 
use of a light celluloid splint may be sufficient to restrain the 
spasm and to give relief in some cases. The administration 
of bromides is useful in many cases as an adjuvant to local 
treatment. In view of the fact that we are dealing with an 
abnormal movement aitd not with peripherally arising spasm, 
it is to be expected that motor nerve or nerve root section 
should give unsatisfactory results. This is indeed the case, 
and the original spasm being stopped by paralysing the muscles 
concerned is apt to be replaced by the development of 
comparable spasm in other neck muscles. However, occasional 
sucoeases are obtained by extensive denervation of muscles, a 
severe operation for which old and debilitated subjects are 
unfitted. 

F. M. R. Walshb. 


62 



PSYCHOLOGICAL JWEDICINE 

D efinition. — P sycluatiy is that branch of medicine 
whose special province is the study and treatment of all 
types and degrees of mental ill-health, however produced. 
Put in the most general terms, mental ill-health is experi- 
enced subjectively as a substantial impairment of comfort 
and happiness, and is shown objectively as a substantial 
impairment of efficiency, or of the capacity for satisfactory 
social relationships. 

It is, of course, true that these effects are usually produced 
as the result of physical disorder or disease ; and although 
general medicine has in the past been little concerned with 
such psychological and social considerations, yet these are 
always important aspects of every illness, and should be con- 
sidered in every case. Psychiatry, however, whilst emphasising 
the importance of the commonly neglected psychological 
aspect of illness, has no desire to claim the whole of medicine 
as its domain ; and it is only when the psychological aspect 
should l>e regarded as being pr^ominant that a patient becomes 
primarily a psychiatric problem. 

In 1938 there were 158,723 patients notified as under 
care in the mental hospitals of England and Wales (3*9 per 
thousand of the population), and 23,153 patients were admitted 
to mental hospitals for the first time. It has l>een estimated 
that 1 in 35 of all bom is certified at some time before death, 
while of those reaching adolescence the proportion is, of course, 
still higher. 

In addition there were 89,904 patients in institutions for 
mental defectives (2-2 per thousand of the population) ; but 
this falls far short of the total number of defectives in England 
and Wales, which has been estimated at 300,000. The figures 
for Scotland are comparable. 

There are no reliable figures available as to the number 
suffering from minor forms of mental ill-health (fiequently 
masquerading as physical disease), of insufficient severity to 
necessitate institutional care, but none the less potent causes 

97S 



.ETIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDER 


979 


of personal misery and social inefficiency. There can be no 
doubt, however, that this group is an enormous one. It has 
even been estimated as 30 per cent, of all sick persons (Report 
of B.M.A. Committee on Mental Health). 

When to the above is added the large army of the socially 
undesirable and inadequate — criminals, drunkards, prostitutes, 
and many more with an important psychiatric aspect — it 
will be realised that the magnitude of the problem which 
confronts psychiatry reaches dimensions much larger than 
that provided by any one branch of general medicine, and is 
comparable with that confronted by general medicine as a 
whole. 


.ETIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDER 

The basic fetiological principle in psychiatry is that (1) 
psychological factors, (2) physical factors, and (3) constitutional 
factors must be considered in every patient. 

These terjs, mental, physical, and constitutional, of course 
really only denote aspects of the total activity of conscious 
human beings. It is, however, convenient to separate them, 
and to regard both normal and abnormal behaviour as result- 
ing from the interaction of the three corresponding factors. 
Moreover it must be remembered that these three groups of 
factors — mental, physical, and constitutional — are inevitably 
and invariably present and operative, though they may be 
regarded as varying greatly in their practical importance from 
individual to individual, and from case to case. 

Now clearly it would be unreasonable to expect either the 
normal or abnormal behaviour of human beings that issues 
from the complex series of interreactions of these three factors 
to be wholly explicable in terms of any one member. Thus, 
there is never a single and simple cause for normal behaviour, 
nor is there ever a single and simple cause for mental ill-health. 

The necessity for such a triple approach can sometimes be 
seen in an almost diagrammatic way. Thus, a man, whose 
mother had been in a mental hospital, developed influenza, 
as the result of which he lost his job and became profoundly 
depressed. Few cases show their mixed aetiology quite so 
clearly, but all possess it, and it is one of the tasks of psychiatry 
to try to assess the relative importance of the different causes 
in a particular case. 

Certain oonaequenoes of this basic principle of triple aetiology 
may now be mentioned : — 

(a) Since physical factors are always present, and may be 



980 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

extremely important in producing mental symptoms, it follows 
that psychiatry caiuiot be sharply separate from general 
medicine. A general medical training and a sound knowledge 
of general medicine are, therefore, essential for psychiatric 
study and practice. 

(6) The view is sometimes held that mental illness has 
always a physical cause. It is, of course, true that the develop- 
ment of mental symptoms can quite frequently, as in senile 
dementia or febrile delirium, be regarded as the more or less 
direct consequence of physical disorder or disease. But it 
would be wrong to assume that this must always be so. 
Psychological factors can also be extremely important ; and 
there is no logical or scientific necessity whatever for the 
assumption that mental symptoms may not result as the 
more or less direct consequence of psychological causes, or, 
for that matter, of constitutional causes. In brief, any of the 
three groups of factors can assu m e predominant importance. 

(c) Even when, as in senile dementia or febrile delirium, 
the occurrence of mental illness can be more or less directly 
attributed to physical causes, it will be obvious that the study 
of such impersonal physical factors cannot possibly account 
for the individual or personal difference in tlie mental symptoms 
displayed. The explanation of the individual psychological 
symptomatology (content) must clearly be sought in the 
personal biography of the individual concerned. Thus, to give 
a crude illustration, a patient cannot harbour the delusion 
that electricity is played on him unless he has heard of it. 

This problem of the distinction between occurrence and 
content, or the problem of the distinction between the atiolcgy 
of the condition and the genesis of the psychological symptoms, 
is a very important one. The elucidation of, for example, 
physical factors, may throw great light upon the former, but 
can never throw much light upon the latter ; for psychological 
states can never be completely described or understood with 
the ph 3 r 8 ioal concepts of general medicine. This does not, 
however, imply that they cannot be approached scientifically. 

(d) M^tal illness, of whatever origin, must have a mental 
aspect. This perhaps explains, if it does not excuse, the 
tendency to the view that mental symptoms are entirely 
dependent upon mental causes. This, of course, is equally as 
erroneous as is the view that mental symptoms are entirely 
dependent upon physical causes. It is very important, when 
deal^ with mental iUness, to be aware of the dan|^ of a 
spurious psychogenesis. This may result in the following way. 
The study of the biography of a patient often discloses psycho- 



.ETIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDER 


981 


logical experiences that are clearly related to the mental 
83nnptom8 he shows. But not infrequently these psychological 
experiences are important only as regards the origin of the 
psychological symptoms ; and it is very easy to make the 
mistake of ascribing to the psychological experiences that 
determine the genesis of the psychological symptoms, ®tio- 
logical importance in the production of the whole reaction, 
which they do not possess, and which should be sought 
elsewhere in the physical or constitutional fields. 

A simple illustration is afforded by a case of depression 
(melancholia), a condition primarily of constitutional origin 
which is frequently characterised by self-reproach. Now there 
are few who have not some cause for self-reproach ; and the 
particular topic of self-reproach may be given and accepted 
as the cause of the depression, when it should really be regarded 
as a consequence. 

Each of these three groups of factors — psychological, 
physical, constitutional — ^will now be considered in greater 
detail. It will soon be apparent how artificial is the separation, 
and how much they are inter-related and overlap. 

Psychological Factors. — Generally speaking, it can be said 
that from the psychological point of view, mental symptoms 
are alw'ays produced by emotional disturbance, or by mental 
activity associated with emotional disturbance. It may often 
seem that something else is responsible, such as overwork ; but 
it can generally be shown fairly readily that it is not the 
overwork itself, but the emotional strain under which it has 
been done, or which has driven the patient to undertake it, 
that explains the breakdo^'n. 

Normal and Morbid Emotional Reactions . — We tend to 
regard as normal any emotional reaction that we can readily 
understand as being justified by the circumstances. We can, 
for example, all rmderstand the depression that follows a 
recent bereavement. There is, of course, no sharp line at which 
abnormality begins. But, put in most general terms, emotion 
may become morbid either (1) by reason of its intensity and 
duration, or (2) because it is produced by what seems an 
inadequate cause. 

Thus, whilst a degree of depression can be regarded as the 
normal reaction to a bereavement, the development of a 
profound condition of melancholia cannot be so regarded ; 
similarly, whilst a considerable degree of fear is normal during 
a bombardment, the development of the same degree of fear 
becomes pathological when aroused by the task of crossing an 
empty street. 



982 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

The Origin of Morbid Emotion , — ^The origin of emotional 
disturbance must not solely be sought in the nature of the 
environmental situation ; for the reaction to the stress imposed 
by a particular situation will vary according to the nature of 
the individual exposed to it. Therefore, two factors — the 
environment and the individual — ^must always be considered 
Past experience helps to form, but does not entirely determine 
an individual’s nature ; and, similarly, present experience 
helps to form, but does not entirely determine his emotional 
response. 

Psychological causes of emotional disturbance must, there- 
fore, often be sought in the history of the individual, as well 
as in the stress imposed by the more immediate situation 
with which that individual is faced ; and not infrequently 
the experiences of more remote origin are the more important. 

Inner Stress or ‘‘ Menial Conflict .*' — Just as it would be 
impossible to give all the possible situations of strain that 
might be imposed by the more immediate environment, so it 
is impossible to give all the possible causes of more remote 
origin consequent upon past experience, that may also give 
rise to emotional disturbances owing to inner stress or 
** mental conflict.” 

Thus, there is often a discrepancy between duty and desire, 
and between desire and achievement ; and even when what 
was desired is attained, it does not always satisfy. 

This raises an important aspect of mental conflict. A 
patient may be, and often is, adequately and painfully aw^are 
of the nature of his problems ; and he may, or may not, be 
able to cope with them. But often he is not accurately aware 
of the nature of the conflict going on in his mind ; and then 
its solution becomes a difficult matter, for it is less easy to 
cope with a situation the true nature of which is not understood 
or which is mistakenly supposed to be other than it is. 

A lack of knowledge of the factors that induce our feelings 
and dictate our actions is inevitably present in some degree 
in everyone ; but this ignorance is o^n present in cases of 
mental disorder, and may be an important factor in their 
causation. 

This lack of knowledge arises because (1) introspection is 
not available for those factors — physical and constitutional — 
which are not psychological. Knowledge of these factors must 
at best be incomplete, inferential, and not direct ; (2) because 
introspection is imperfect even for those factors that are 
susceptible of introspection, namely, psychological factors. 

It would be a mistake to suppose that int^rospection is 



ETIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDER 983 

normally, or ever, exhaustive and infallible. It is as easy, 
and probably much more common, to make mistakes in 
describing what is in or on our minds, as it is to make mistakes 
in describing a scene in the outer world. In the one case, as 
in the other, desires, prejudices, and expectations will distort 
observation and falsify recollection, so that the real con- 
stituents of the scene will be ignored, misdescribed, or a wrong 
attribution of their origin will be made. These errors will 
occur more readily if the results of more accurate introspection 
or observation are disconcerting or disgusting, or damaging to 
the self-esteem, and thus calculated to arouse emotions of an 
unpleasant character. 

Such a sequence of events is sometimes described as an 
example of repression into the unconscious. 

Now if ever a word deserved to be paid overtime it is the 
term unconscious. Indeed, the term unconscious has been 
used in so many different senses that it would seem preferable 
to limit its meaning to that defined on page 989, and to call 
subconscious those phenomena which are not remembered 
owing to emotional factors, or which, if recalled or available 
to consciousness, are not correctly recognised and correlated 
because their recognition and .correlation would be distasteful 
or intolerable to the personality. 

Again, repression does not mean discipline or self-discipline, 
but the means whereby self-protection is sought, and the 
preservation of self-esteem attempted, through self-deception 
or the adoption of the policy of the ostrich. Repression (self- 
deception) may, for some, be a helpful or even essential method 
of achieving an adjustment to life ; but for others it may be 
harmful and crippling, by preventing them from realising the 
true nature of their difficulties, which do not cease to exist 
because they are not recognised, but which, if correctly 
recognised, they may be able to face and to solve. 

It is startling how the inability to connect facts which are 
obviously related bears no relationship to intelligence. Thus, 
a popular young curate of charm and considerable ability 
began to develop doubts about religion and shortly after- 
wards palpitations, sweating, and a feeling of collapse, at 
first only when called upon to preach, but later at other times 
as well. After exhaustive physical investigations had proved 
negative, he was seen by a psychiatrist, when the above story 
rapidly emerged, and it was found that he had made no con- 
nection between his religious scruples and the development of 
his symptoms in the pulpit. 

The significant psychological factors at work can often 



9»4 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

adequately be understood by a careful history taken along 
ordinary hnes, and it is by no means always necessary or wise 
to seek for the essential psychological causes in the remote 
past or early childhood. Psychological delving of this type 
always involves two dangers, namely, either that of leading 
the victim along tracks which conform to the preconceptions 
of the investigator, or arriving at facts, attitudes, or problems 
which are, or which are supposed to be, so universal that they 
have no value in explaining individual difficulties. Such 
setiological whipping-boys as the “ cedipus situation ” or 
inferiority complex can explain ever3rthing and therefore 
explain nothing. Indeed they approximate perilously to the 
explanation that would be afforded by attributing a patient’s 
condition to his birth, which has, however, the ^vantage of 
being quite certainly true, ' 

Furthermore, it must be remembered that, since psycho- 
logical factors are never the only causal factors, psychological 
explanations must, of necessity, be incomplete as causal 
explanations. Even if they account for the particular symptoms 
that are shown, they may fail to explain why these occurred 
at the time they did. Thus, the sexual offences of an early 
paretic may be interpreted in the light of his “ mother-fixation ” 
or his aggressive tendencies towards his father ; but such 
interpretative excursions do not explain why he behaved 
normally before the time of the offence, and worse than this, 
no plumbing of psychological depths can bring to daylight the 
(unconscious) invasion of the brain by spirochtetes. 

This example illustrates the dangers of purely psychoiogioal 
explanations, and why it is so mistaken and misleading to 
regard the unconscious as an explanatory widow’s cruse. 

The Effect of Morbid Emotion . — Emotional upset, however 
caused, may produce symptoms of either mental or bodily 
distress or both combing. 

A clear recognition of the effects of the physical accompani- 
ments of emotion is of cardinal psychiatric importance. They 
explain how it comes about that so many patients, who should 
be regarded as psychiatric problems, do not complain primarily 
or at all of mental symptoms, but do complain of ph3rsioal 
symptoms. These patients naturally but erroneously tend to 
believe that physical experiences and ph3r8ical symptoms have 
a physical origin, and do not relate their physical symptoms 
to emotional disturbance because they cannot see the con- 
nection, and often do not want to. Their “ resistance ” often 
arises because it is more pleasant to attribute an illness to a 
potent poison than to a poor personality. 



ETIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDER * 985 

Bodily symptoms of so-called “ functional ” origin will 
occur more really if the physical make-up of the patient is 
of such a type ^at it rea^y responds to emotional dis- 
turbance. Thus, certain individuals with a labile vasomotor 
system readily respond to emotion with tachycardia, others 
by fainting. They thereby provide examples of the inter- 
relation of different factors. 

Physical Factors. — By physical factors are here meant the 
states of physical disorder or disease that are studied in general 
medicine : infections, intoxications, disorders of nutrition and 
circulation, metabolic and endocrine disturbance. 

Constitutional as well as “ exogenous ” physical factors 
can, of course, be very important in the production of these 
conditions ; this only serves to emphasise once more how 
artificial is their separation. But those constitutional factors 
that are more directly concerned in the production of mental 
disorder (such as her^ty) wiU be dealt with later. 

The Physical Basis of Menial Disorder . — Sometimes mental 
changes can be correlated with general brain damage, as in 
arteriosclerotic dementia, and occasionally particular mental 
symptoms can be correlated with localised brain damage, as 
in post-apoplectic aphasia. But in the majority of mental 
syndromes neither macroscopic nor microscopic changes have 
been found in the central nervous system. It must, however, 
be remembered that our present methods of examination are 
very crude, and can as yet tell us very little of the presumptive 
changes in the central nervous sj'stem that accompany 
functional activity, nonnal or abnormal. Electro -encephalo- 
graphy [vide p. 879) may in time throw some light on these 
matters. 

Indeed, unless disordered function is the result of per- 
manent structural change in the brain, the demonstration of 
abnormal histological findings cannot reasonably be anticipated. 
It would therefore be a mistake to seek for the pathology of 
mental disorder only in the pathology of the brain, and it 
would be an even greater mistake to seek it only in neurohisto- 
pathology. 

The importance of the physical changes that accompany 
emotion have already been mentioned ; and it must be 
emphasised that these physical changes are just as much a 
part of an emotional reaction as is the ment^ experience of 
emotion, of which indeed they form an integral part. 

This mutual relationship and interdependency between the 
mental and the physical aspect is often parUcularly well shown 
in the course of a case of Graves’ disease. 



986 ' 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


The Assessment of Physical Factors , — As has been men- 
tioned, physical factors may be of predominant importance 
in the production of mental disorder ; and there is no form 
of mental disorder, mild or grave, in which physical factors 
may not play a more or less important contributory part. 
It must, however, be emphasised that the importance of 
physical factors is often grecitly exaggerated, and that physical 
abnormality is often coincidental and not causal. 

When physical factors are of predominant setiological 
importance, as in general paralysis of the insane, the mental 
changes wiU be those of an “ organic ty^ of mental reaction,” 
the characteristics of which will be described later. 

As a working rule it can be taken that, in so far as mental 
changes resemble less those of an “ organic type of mental 
reaction,” and approximate to some other type of syndrome, 
so does the predominant aetiological importance of physical 
factors become suspect. 

Anything, however, that lowers the general efficiency of 
the patient will facilitate the development of mental disorder 
in a susceptible subject ; hence arises the importance of 
physical factors as a contributory cause. As the man in the 
street rightly believes “ worries get a hold ” on those who 
are physically run down in a way they wotild not otherwise. 

Physical Factors of Crude Exogenous Type. — Nevertheless, 
although such factors as chronic infections or intoxications, 
resulting from “ focal sepsis ” or other cause, should always 
be souglit for and dealt with, their removal or eradication 
seldom produces that benefit in mental disorder that the 
student might be led to expect. The importance of physical 
factors of a crude exogenous type has been in the past, 
and sometimes still is, grossly exaggerated. In the majority 
of mental disorders no evidence can be found of ” exogenous ” 
physical factors that can reasonably be inferred to possess 
practical importance ; and it seems probable that the physical 
basis for mental disorder should rather be sought in metabolic 
and other disturbances of a more subtle kind. 

Endocrine Olands . — The vegetative nervous system and 
the endocrine glands exert a profound influence on metabolism, 
and play uo essential part in the integration of mind and body. 
They are, therefore, of special interest in psychiatry. Although 
there can be no doubt about their importance, very little 
exact knowledge is as yet available as regards the r61e of 
endocrine glan^ in the production of mental symptoms. This 
is well shown in the sexual glands, and is all the more striking 
as their influence on the mind is best known. 



ETIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDER 


987 


Thus, we know that the highest incidence of psychoses 
occurs round about puberty and the climacteric, i.e., the times 
of the beginning and end of the reproductive period ; and we 
know that menstruation is often accompanied by symptoms of 
emotional disturbance, which can in some women be serious. 
But we no longer firmly, if vaguely, attribute psychoses to 
amenorrhoea, or regard masturbation as a cause of schizo- 
phrenia. For we now regard amenorrhoea, which is very 
frequent in the case of major psychoses, as the consequence of 
the deranged metabolism accompanying them, rather than as 
their cause ; and we now realise that masturbation can be 
regarded as a normal phase in development, and that in 
schizophrenia it is often only a symptom. 

Constitutional Factors. — Physique. — The constitutional 
background may be demonstrated to some extent in the 
patient’s physique, and attention has been drawn by Kretschmer 
to different types which can be observed amongst mental 
patients as well as in the general population. 

1. The Asthenic or “ Leptosomatic ” Type is characterised 
by a narrow build, an angular profile, and by a lean, dyspeptic, 
and hungry look. Individuals of this type look tajler than 
they are. Their skin is poorly vascularised and pale, and the 
distal parts of their extremities tend to be cyanotic. They are 
flabby and of poor muscular development. Their chest is long, 
narrow, and flat. The subcostal angle is less than 90 degrees. 

2. The Pyhiic or “ Pyknosomaiic ” Type is well demon- 
strated by “ John Bull,” with his large body cavities and 
generous distribution of fat about the trunk. John Bull in 
his younger days, if a typical pyknic, had a handsome body 
with a graceful motor apparatus and small and delicate 
extremities. 

3. The Athleiic or ” Aihletosornatic ” Type is recognised 
by the strongly-made skeleton and muscles and is well seen 
in a certain type of raw-boned Scot. It is less clearly defined 
than the other tw^o, but is perhaps more definite than other 
types that have been described, such as the dysplastic. 

There is a certain affinity between the pyknic build, 
cyclothymic make-up and the development of manic-depressive 
psychoses on the one hand, and on the other hand between 
an asthenic build, a schizoid make-up, and the development 
of schizophrenic reactions. These facts are of interest, and 
may have some practical value in the assessment of certain 
mixed and complex mental reactions. But it must be empha- 
sised that these associations are by no means invariable and 
that there are many exceptions. 



988 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


Hbbbdity. — ^The study of heredity has a much greater 
practical importance than that of physique in the analysis of the 
constitutional factors involved in an individual case. There 
are three methods by which this subject has been investigated. 

1. The atvdy of the family or relations of the individual 
patient may disclose the same or similar reactions among them. 
This may furnish valuable information for a correct assessment 
of the factors at work, and hence may give indications as to 
the nature of the treatment that should be adopted. It will, 
of course, be necessary first of all to try to disentangle the 
effects of environment from direct hereditary influences ; and 
knowledge obtained by the other two methods gives some help. 

2. Twin Stvdies. — The comparative study of uniovular and 
binovular twins gives an indication of the relative importance 
of environmental and hereditary factors, because uniovular 
twins have the same hereditary equipment, whereas binovular 
twins are not more closely related genetically than other 
brothers and sisters. Rosanoff examined a series of schizo- 
phrenics who had twin brothers or sisters and found concord- 
ance in 65 per cent, of the imiovular twins, but in only 15 per 
cent, of the binovular ones ; the corresponding figures for 
manic-depressives were 70 and 15 per cent. This proves the 
strong hereditary element in the causation of these psychoses 
and gives some measure of the relative importance of exogenous 
and endogenous factors. 

3. The Study of Familial Incidence. — This method has very 
great value and the results obtained have definite practical 
importance. The frequency of a given mental disorder in the 
relations of the patients suffering from it is compared with the 
frequency of its occurrence in the general population. The 
figures obtained by these investigations enable an estimate 
to be made of the probable degree of danger of the mental dis- 
order occurring in a given relation. These figures, if used with 
statistical caution, provide the only basis for eugenic measures. 

Schizophrenia. — The frequency of scliizophrenia amongst 
the general population has been estimated at 0*85 per cent. 
Among brothers and sisters the incidence is about double 
of that in the general population (Pollock, Malzberg, and 
Fuller). Various studies make it probable that it is due to 
one gene which is tnuismitted reoessively, but twin studies 
have shown that the “ penetrative ” power of this gene is 
only 65 per cent. This means, put in rather crude terms, that 
the relative significance of genetic and environmental factors 
is about 2 to 1. If the chikiien of schizophrenics survive their 
twentieth year 8 per cent, develop tiie oondiUon, and 60 per 



SYMPTOMS IN MENTAL DISEASE 


989 


cent, of the children show a schizoid personality, t.c., they show 
character traits which are commonly noticed in the pre-psychotic 
personality of the schizophrenic. It is difficult to assess these 
from the genetic point of view, for some of them may be 
abortive cases of schizophrenia, and others carriers. Three 
per cent, of the grandc^dren of schizophrenics develop the 
condition, and the prognosis is held to worse in so far as 
the character of the parents was abnormal ; !• 8 per cent, 
of the cousins of schizophrenics, i.e., double the figure in the 
general population develop schizophrenia, and the figure 
for nephews and nieces is the same. Further analysis gives the 
following results : a frequency of O' 9 per cent, if neither of 
the parents is schizoid ; 2 per cent, if one of the parents is 
schizoid, and 11 per cent, if both parents are schizoid. 

Manic Depressive Psychoses . — ^The manic-depressive con- 
stitution is probably due to a single dominant gene, but only 
20 to 30 per cent, of the carriers develop a psychosis. The 
figures of the liability of the various relations to be affected 
are 9' 5 per cent, of the children and 2’ 5 per cent, of the 
nephews, nieces, and first cousins. The figures for the general 
population are given as between 0- 23 and 0- 44 per cent. These 
figures are worked out for Central European populations ; 
they may differ for the population of the U.K. In New York 
State incidence of manic-depressive psychoses among the 
relatives of the patients studied is considerably higher than the 
expected rate, the excess being greatest among sisters of the 
female sufferers from the disease. 

Mental Deficiency . — Although the inheritance of the mental 
defective is much less well known than the inheritance of the 
psychoses, nevertlieless, the results of statistical inquiry are of 
practical value. , Thus, if both parents are mentally defective, 
61*5 per cent, of the children show mental deficiency as well ; 
if only one, the incidence is 29 per cent. These figures do not 
pretend to say anything about the relative importance of 
hereditary and environmental factors. 


SYMPTOMS ENCOUNTERED IN MENTAL 
DISEASE 

It is essential for the student to know what are the more 
important symptoms that may be shown in mental disorder, 
and tliat he should also be clear as to the meaning of the 
technical terms that have been used to describe them. 

UnoonsdonaiMH. — ^An unconscious patient is neither aware 



990 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

of his environment nor capable of responding to psycho- 
logical stimuli in a psychologically understandable way (t»- 
accessibilily). He is subsequently incapable of recalling any 
mental activity during the period in question. States of 
unconsciousness are best observed after severe concussion, in 
deep anaesthesia, and as a final stage of many intoxications. 
Between unconsciousness and consciousness there are various 
types and degrees of disturbed consciousness. 

Dutuibances of Conscioosness. — These disturbances are 
mainly due to physical causes, and the general characteristics 
may be given as follows : — 

(а) Deficient grasp and its consequences. The patients have 

a difficulty in fixing their attention and in grasping 
what is taking place. They therefore do not fully 
understand the true nature of their situation and 
consequently cannot adjust their behaviour in a way 
that is appropriate. 

(б) Disorientation. 

(c) Disconnected and incomprehensible behaviour. 

(d) Slowness of thinking and disturbances of retention with 

subsequent amnesia. 

Three intermediate states betw'een consciousness and 
unconsciousness are often recognised : — 

1. Dimming or Clottding of Consciottsness (often rather 

unfortunately called “ Confusion ”). — Less than 
normal rather than anything abnormal is experienced. 
All mental processes are slow. Association of ideas 
is scanty. Thinking is difficult or impossible. 
These patients are apathetic and bemused, show no 
initiative, are easily fatigued, and it is hard to attract 
or to hold their attention. They tend to pass into a 
dreamless sleep, stupor, or coma. In mild cases the 
patients may answer and behave rationally under ex- 
amination, but readily relapse when left to themselves. 
In cases of moderate severity, although out of touch 
with their surrotmdings, they may be roused to answer 
simple questions correctly. And in severe oases it 
may just be possible to get an occasional appropriate 
response by forcible questioning or commands. 

2. Ddirifnu States . — ^Tbe consdousness is clouded, and the 

continuity of mentdl processes is interrupted or 
shattered by abnormal experiences such as h^uoina- 
tions. Restlessness is a most common feature. 



SYMPTOMS IN MENTAL DISEASE 991 

3. Twilight States, — ^There is a peculiar alteration of con- 
sciousness and personality for certain periods of 
limited duration, with subsequent amnesia. They 
are mainly encountered in epilepsy (vide p. 1038), and 
also, rarely, in hysteria. 

Attention is the term used for describing the experience 
that certain objects are in the centre of consciousness, whilst, 
others lie more towards the periphery. This distribution 
may be achieved either voluntarily or involuntarily. Attention 
may be disturbed in various ways : — 

1. It may be difficult or impossible to arouse the attention 

of the patient. This generally occurs in organic 
reactions resulting in disturbed consciousness ; but it 
may also occur in states of “ retardation,’ ' perplexity, 
or self-absorption due to depression or schizophrenia. 

2. It may be difficult or impossible to keep the attention 

of the patient, (a) because the patient returns to 
predominant preoccupations (depression and schizo- 
phrenia) ; (h) because the attention of the patient is 
readily distracted by stimuli from the outside, this 
distractibility preventing concentration on any given 
subject for any length of time (manic and certain 
organic pictures) ; (r) because the attention may have 
been caught and kept by some incidental stimulus in 
the external environment from which it cannot be 
detached (certain organic states). 

Volition* General Activity* Motor Behaviour . — Lack of 
Initiative is most frequently seen in neurasthenic states, and 
in depressive and schizophrenic psychoses, but may also be 
observed in lesions of the frontal lobe or the basal ganglia. 

Retardation denotes slowness of speech and action, generally 
combined with a poverty of impulses and tardiness of response. 
It occurs in depressions, and when very severe, it may result 
in depressive stupor. 

Psychomotor Hyper-activiiy, together with an increased speed 
of action, is seen in manic states. Impulses may follow one 
another so rapidly that none are properly carried out or 
completed. 

In Catatonic Excitement the motor behaviour is generally 
more disintegrated, and features like stereotypy (monotonous 
repetition in speech and movements) mannerisms, and grimacing, 
are often observed and are highly characteristic. 

P6f«et;em<ion, as opposed to stereotypy, denotes therepetition 



992 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


of a movement or action in spite of the patient’s effort or desire 
to produce a new one. It may be most marked in the field of 
speech and difficult to distinguish from aphasic disturbances 
(see p. 816). It is common in all organic states. 

Stupor means complete suppression of speech, movement, 
and action not accounted for by profound disturbances of 
consciousness. It is commonly produced by schizophrenic 
.disturbances of will, but it may result from extreme retarda- 
tion in melancholic patients. Flexibilitas cerea (a peculiar 
type of “ wax-like ” rigidity of the muscles), catalepsy (the 
tendency to keep up postures which have been imposed), and 
negativism (automatic resistance to all outside stimuli) are 
symptoms that are often foimd. 

Suggestion means influence by processes other than reason ; 
suggestibility is the capacity — varying in each individual — of 
yielding to such influences. This normal attribute is increased 
in states of disturbed consciousness. It is strikingly present 
in hypnosis, and in schizophrenics it may reach the extreme 
degree of automatic obedience. Echopraxia and echolalia, t.e.' 
the automatic repetition of actions which are seen, or of words 
which are heard, are particular examples of this. 

Abnormal impulses, such as kleptomania (the impulse to 
steal), pyromania (the impulse to set . fire to things), are 
better classified with compulsive or obsessional phenomena, 
i.e. actions carried out imder the subjective feeling of being 
forced to do them, either without or against intention or 
desire. 

Feelings of Passivity (or of being influenced) describe those 
conditions when patients believe their experiences are produced 
by some outside agency or force, or that they are under the 
attempted or sucoessfiil direction or control of this outside 
agency or force. These may range from bodily experiences, 
attributed to electricity, to strangely developed mental experi- 
ences, attributed to hypnotism, electrical waves, or the operation 
of wireless or telepathy. 

These phenomena are very common in schizophrenia. 

Diftorbanoei o( Thought. — Retardation, encountered midnly 
in depressive states, is characterised by slowness or difficulty 
in the process of thinking often accompanied by a poverty of 
ideas of which the patients are clearly aware. A^y depressive 
patients who are retMded do not, however, so much complain 
of slow thoughts or empty minds, as of thoughts that go round 
and round but do not get on. An extreme poverty of associa- 
tion may lead to a form of perseveration very like that seen 
in organic conditions. 



SYMPTOMS IN MENTAL DISEASE 993 

CircumMantiality means slow progression of thought when 
due to a tendenpy to digress into trivial bypaths or irrelevancies. 
This tpe of thinlring oan often be found in epileptics, in morons, 
and in patients with organic diseases of the brain. 

Flight of Ideas denotes a severe degree of the manic 
disturbance of thinking. Manic patients think quickly and 
have a great wealth of association ; but these are superficial 
and often dictated by rhymes. Manic patients cannot pursue 
a consecutive line of thought of a purposive kind. Flight of 
ideas is an exaggeration of the method of thinking which 
Schopenhauer attributed to certain authors. “ They write as 
if they were playing dominoes. The incidental number of the 
last piece determines the next, and the following piece has no 
relation to the last but one.” An example of “ flight of ideas ” 
is provided by a manic patient who said “ maternal, paternal, 
infernal, Dante.” 

Incoherdhce denotes the breaking up of the ordinary sequence 
or structiire of thought into larger or smaller fragments. It 
is sometimes possible to discover why ideas with apparently 
no connection are associated with one another. The reason for 
such associations differ from those that govern ordinary logical 
thinking. Incoherence occurs in schizophrenia, when it has a 
particular quality, and in confusional states, as after an 
anaesthetic. Normal people may experience something very 
similar in dreams. 

Blocking, or a sudden interruption in the stream of thought, 
occurs in schizophrenia. 

Neologisma are frequently invented by schizophrenics. A 
patient, for instance, described a drawing : ” Cordron. A theme 
of curved amd fancy lines, stcollic st, from steeple word from 
the point on the top of the post coUic (unexplainable) word 
matching the point ; caller firom the cordron and cross piece. 
Squirrel, wirrel, from wear! ; the curls in the lines which look 
like a wear! pool.” 

Predominant Ideas are convictions not based on reason 
but on an emotional foundation. They are not necessarily 
pathologioal, and every normal person tends to develop them 
in the fields of politics, religion, and love. 

The term ” Paranoid ” implies a sense of a hostile environ* 
ment coupled with a tendency towards the fisrmation of 
delusions of a systematised character to explain it. 

A Ddusion is a false belief which cannot be corrected by an 
appeal to reason or logic. Ibe education and environment 
must be taken into account in assessing whether a patient’s 
ideas diottld be r^(arded as delusional or not. Prkuaiy (or 
63 



994 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

autochthonous) delusions spring up suddenly with conviction 
but without previous warning, often in the setting of a peculiar 
tense emotional atmosphere. They are characteristic of early 
schizophrenia. Thus a schizophrenic became suddenly certain 
that the firing of cannon in Hyde Park to celebrate the King’s 
birthday really foretold the end of the world. 

Many delusions are secondary to hallucinations, but they 
can occasionally develop from a real event or experience as the 
result of systematic although emotionally biassed reasoning. 

Delusions are usually classified as delusions of grandeur, of 
self-reproach, of poverty, of reference, of persecution, or as 
hypochondriacal delusions, according to their content. 

Some schools of psychology try to explain their origin 
by invoking various psychological mechanisms. Delusions of 
grandeur, for example, are said to result from over-compensa- 
tion to feelings of inadequacy, insecurity, or inferiority. Self- 
reproach is explained as incomplete or unsuccessful repression 
which leaves the feeling of gtiilt behind. Persecutory or 
paranoid ideas are said by some psychiatrists to represent the 
projection of repressed homosexual tendencies. Most authors, 
however, would regard this last explanation as too restricted, 
and would hold that any undesirable tendency or quality 
which could not consciously be endured by the individual may 
be projected and result in a delusion of persecution. 

The recognition of these mechanisms, when they can be 
proved to exist in an individual case, may be of value as 
indicating how that case should be approached ; but their 
wholesale assumption is unwise, and may prevent the investi- 
gator from seeing the really significant psychological connections 
in an individual case. 

Indeed, they are often a mere description in other terms, 
and it can frequently be demonstrated that a variety of different 
delusions may be equally well understood by invoking the same 
mechmiism, which limits its value as an explanation of any 
particular delusion. For instance, although hypochondriasis 
may be explained as representing the flight from environmental 
or personal difficulties, into illness, yet this explanation is too 
general, and does not account for the transition from a mere 
preoccupation with the bodily functions to definite delusional 
formation, such as that the bowels are blocked or that the 
organs are rotting away, or that the brain is liquefying, or that 
the body is dead (nihilistic ideas). 

Obae 09 umal Jdms (compulsive thoughts) must be dis- 
tinguished from dehu^ns and from predominant ideas. 
Oompnisive thoughts are recognised as bdng abnonnal and 



SYMPTOMS IN MENTAL DISEASE 995 

foreign to the penionality, and are resented and resisted. The 
patient struggles against an obsessional idea, but fights for his 
delusions, and accepts or revels in his predominant pre- 
occupation. In content, obsessional thoughts are often banal 
and pointless, but sometimes indecent, blasphemous, or 
aggressive formulations may be expressed. 

Disturbances ol Affect (or Emotion). — ^The disturbances 
may consist of variations in intensity or duration, or the 
emotional response may be abnormal because it is inappro- 
priate in the particular situation. Some of the emotions met 
with in psychotic patients are of a kind either unknown in 
normal individuals, or only experienced by them in very special 
circumstances. 

Intensity. — Some patients show an increase in the intensity 
of their emotions at the beginning of an .acute psychosis, 
others, however, complain of their poverty and loss of emotion 
{affective loss). This is common in depressions and in early 
schizophrenia. Again, certain quite normal individuals are 
acutely aware of complete emotional detachment after a 
psychic shock, such as seeing an accident. This is usually a 
transient experience of no significance. Shallowness of affect is 
frequently seen in imbeciles, schizophrenics and in dements. 
In so-called moral insanity (moral imbecility) the social sense is 
poorly developed or apparently missing. 

Incapacity to control the emotions and their expression is 
characteristic of organic syndromes {emotional incontinence and 
lability). Normal emotional experiences, such as elation, 
depression, irritability, anxiety may become morbid by reason 
of their intensity and duration, but the extreme degrees of 
melancholy and panic are never experienced by the normal 
individual. Ecstasy may be described as a feeling of over- 
whelming bliss combined with an all-pervading sense of 
clearness of perception. It is often associated with a feeling 
of suspicion and fear, and not infrequently accompanied or 
follow^ by the appearance of autochthonous delusions. True 
ecstasy is probably beyond the experience of the imagination 
of normal persons. States of ecstasy are chiefly seen in 
schizophrenia. 

Incongruity of Affect. — This is also a frequent symptom of 
schizophrenia. By incongruity of affect is meant, for example, 
t^t the patient may refer witli indifference to the most 
horrible experiences, or even jest about them. 

Ambivalence denotes the simultaneous existence of contra- 
dictory emotions, also frequently observed in schizophrenics. 

DlrturbuiOM HjMttmry. — ^The function of remembering 



996 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

is genenilly divided into (a) Registration, (6) Retention, 
(c) Recall. 

(а) Registratim . — ^Registration of the material to be 
remember^ may be disturbed by lack of concentration. Thus, 
in manic states, the distractibility of attention prevents the 
patient from perceiving properly what is happening. The manic 
patient will therefore tend only to remember subsequently 
those things that by chance or because of their special 
impressiveness, did not escape his attention. In states of 
unconsciousness nothing can be recorded, hence the subsequent 
amnesia. When consciousness is dimmed or clouded, only a 
partial or patchy recollection of what has taken place remains. 
This may even extend to a complete amnesia if registration was 
grossly defident. 

(б) Retention ^ — ^Disturbances of retention should only be 
assumed if it is certain that registration and recall are 
unaffected. Retention for short or longer periods of time 
(the latter being essential for learning) may be disturbed to a 
Afferent degree. The capacity for retaining visual and auditory 
material may also differ markedly. In general, the capacity 
to retain material is better if associations are present with 
which it can easily be connected. Poverty and slowness of 
skssociation may simulate a memory disturbance. 

(c) Recall . — Recall may be either automatic or voluntary. 
In morbid mental conditions automatic recall is often preserv^ 
whilst the capacity for voluntary recall (i.e., involving conscious 
effort) is frequently impaired. These phenomena can often 
be observed in normal individuals who are fatigued, or in the 
aged, «uid the disturbance is most marked in trying to recall 
names. It is generally possible for a person to recognise some- 
thing immediately which he could not recall on voluntary 
effort, or only to be able to recall facts when something 
associated with them is recollected. Voluntary effort quite 
often seems to interfere with recollection. This fact, which 
is known to everybody by self-observation, may be a prominent 
feature in the Korsakow psychosis. Thus, such patients may 
be unable to recall things when asked to do so directly, 
but recall them readily if the problem is approach^ 
indirectly. 

The ability to recall is facilitated by richness and rajddity 
of association ; consequently poverty or slowness of association 
may make memory distorbancee a^redr more severe tluui they 
really are. All ^turbanoee of recall cannot, however, be 
ex|dained as being due to Iom of initiative or poverty of 
association. Nor ^uld all menmry distorbanees be att^uted 



SYMPTOMS IN MENTAL DISEASE 


997 


to “ repression,” although this may play an important part 
in determining which material is forgotten, or rather which 
material cannot be recollected. 

When memory impairment is due to organic brain disease, 
this is usually shown in memory for recent events rather than 
for remote ones. The gaps of memory, or amnesia, consequent 
upon sudden damage to the brain (head injuries, epileptic fits, 
apoplexies) are often for a longer period than that of the actual 
unconsciousness. This is frequently seen in retrograde amnesia 
after injury to the brain, as when an individual cannot remember 
the accident, or the evente for a variable length of time pre- 
ceding it. The amnesia for the period of unconsciousness, or of 
disturbed consciousness, is due to lack of registration. Antero- 
grade amnesia (that is loss of memory for a period after conscious- 
ness has apparently been regained) is due to a state of altered 
consciousness during the period which the patients do not 
remember afterwards. 

Total loss of memory over a long period, or over the whole 
of life, is generally a hysterical symptom, and inconsistencies 
between the knowledge which ^e patient shows and that 
which he claims to have forgotten may demonstrate that 
the repressed material is very near th% surface of consciousness : 
in other words, deliberate deceit, or a tendency in this direction, 
plays an active part. 

A normal quality of remembering is that it tends to mould 
the past according to desire, and to fill in defects in memory 
with facts which may have been there rather than with facts 
which are genuinely recollected ; and the conviction that such 
false recollection carries is often very striking. When there is 
a pathological loss of memory, the gap is often filled in with the 
most elaborate fabrications. Broadly speaking, the less critical 
the patient, and the more active his initiative, the more capable 
he becomes of producing such fabrications, and of changing 
them under cross-examination. This is often strikingly 
demonstrated in the Korsakow psychosis. 

The feeling of familiarity which is experienced on recognition 
may also, in certain abnormal conditions, be attached to facts 
or ^ings that have not previously been known to the individual. 
This experience of “ d^jk vu ” is known to many normal 
persons when fatigued or sleepy, and it may be a prominent 
featuxe in certain neurotic syndromes. 

In tiie Korsakow psychosis patients not infrequently get 
the ordnr of past events wrong, so that the disturbance is not 
so much a disturbance of correct fact as of correct sequence. 

The inoblem of time perception and its disturbances is 



998 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


still very obscure. Some patients complain that time moves 
too fast or too slowly, or in extreme cases that it seems to 
stand still, or rushes on so fast that they cannot follow. 

Disturbances of Intelligence. — The variation in the amount 
and type of intelligence is very great. Low intelligence is the 
leading symptom of mental deficiency (see p. 1020). An acquired 
disturbance of intelligence when irreversible is known as 
dementia. A moderate degree of deterioration may only be 
evident in an inability to adapt to new problems and situations, 
whilst the capacity to cope with ordinary activities and familiar 
tasks is still preserved. Severe deterioration interferes with 
the adjustment to the ordinary activities of everyday life. 
As regards intellectual performances, creative thinking suffers 
first, abstract reasoning next, imtil finally primitive tasks 
such as the definition of words or the finding of opposites or 
common qualities becomes impossible. The lower the original 
intellectual level, the more difficult it becomes to determine 
mild intellectual impairment. In attempting to do this it is 
always necessary to try to assess the patient’s previous level 
from the past history of previous performance and occupation. 
Tests for original intellectual level are based on the fact that a 
patient’s vocabulary giv^ a fair idea of his intellectual and 
educational level, and that this indicator is relatively resistant 
to mental deterioration. 

INsturbances of Sensation. — Hallucinations . — These may be 
defined as sensory perceptions (mental impressions of sensoiy 
vividness) without objective stimulus. An example would be 
seeing a pink elephant when no pink elephant was present. 
Illusions are real perceptions falsified, an example l^ng to 
mistake a dark stain on a pillow for a bed bug. These 
definitions may be accepted for practical purposos, but it 
should be borne in mind that normal sensory perception is 
far from being an objective picture of reality, but is conditioned 
and modified by many personal factors, both sensory and 
extra-sensory. In other words, there is always a personal 
contribution to a perceptual situation, but the amount of this 
personal contribution veuies eimrmously. This holds true for 
illusions and hallucinations as well as for normal perceptions. 

Some anomalies of sensation may be mentioned Hiat 
should be separated fix>m hallucinations and illusionB in 
the stricter sense. Thus distortions of visual impressfons, 
owing to detachment of the retina, noises in the ear or 
labyrinthine sensalfons due to vascular disturbance, numbness 
or tingling in the extremities due to jnessure on the 
periphmul nerves, all being disturbuices of the appuntos of 



SYMPTOMS IN MENTAL DISEASE 999 

senBation, are better kept apart. The same applies to flashes 
of light, if produced by stimulation of the optic nerve, or the 
more complex subjective experiences product by stimulation 
of the sensory areas of the cortex or cerebral pathways. 

Vistud hallucinations are most commonly found in states 
of impaired consciousness (delirium and twilight states), and 
should always suggest the predominance of an eetiological 
cause of an organic tyi)e. Some normal individuals, however, 
experience visual hallucinations just before they go off to 
sleep (hypnogogic hallucinations). Epileptics in twilight 
states often complain of seeing red colours or fire, but their 
visual experiences may be more elaborate. Visual hallucinations 
in toxic and delirious reactions may range from kaleidoscopic 
patterns, which appear when the eyes are shut, to the most 
complex visions of scenes, persons, animals, and objects, either 
still or moving at various speeds. The impression may be 
vague, or very clear and detailed. The hallucinated objects 
may be projected in a real setting, i.e., a man may be seen 
sitting in a real chair, but may be transparent and uninfluenced 
by any physical happenings around him. Schizophrenics may 
experience symbolic visions, often possessing a .quality of 
intense significance ; but visual hallucinations in schizophrenic 
conditions are more usually in the nature of vivid mental 
pictures rather than experiences which are thought to be part 
and parcel of the external world, and, except in acute phases 
or episodes, are rare. 

Auditory Hallucinations. — ^These are most common in 
schizophrenic states, but also occur in toxic confusional condi- 
tions. They are usually localised in the head, but may apj)ear 
to come from outside. Less frequently they are located in 
some part of the body ; this is very typical of schizophrenia. 
They usually occur in the form of voices of varying distinctness, 
and even when the exact words are not clearly heard, the 
general import is often felt to be plain. Sometimes the 
schizophrenic patient recognises them as his own thoughts, 
made audible to him simultaneously, or anticipating or 
repeating what he is thinking. Noises, such as crea^g, 
shooting, ringing, and so on, may also be heard. Auditory 
hallucinations oi^n have an illusional foundation. 

TactUe Hallucinations. — Tactile hallucinations are described 
by schizophrenic and delirious patients. The patient may 
feel he is being touched or blown upon, or they may take th® 
form of a drizzling sensation of sand or dust. The genital 
oi^Sans are often the seat of tactile hallucinations, which may 
be daborated into a belief that the patient has been the victim 



1000 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

of rape. Some sohizophreoio patients feel that their body, 
or parts of it, has changed in size or weight. Statements 
about a change in the internal organs, such as that the heart 
has become a stone, or that the bowels are blocked, may be 
metaphorical expressions, but are sometimes accepted later as 
statements of facts, and, in so far as this is the case, become 
delusions. 

Olfactory Hallucinations . — Olfactory hallucinations, which 
always seem to have an unpleasant character, are firequently 
complained of by schizophrenics, less frequently by involutional 
melancholics, and occasionally by delirious patients. 

Hallucinations have many points in common witii sensory 
perceptions, but they also possess certam distinguishing 
qualities, quite apart f^m the absence of appropriate stimulus. 
Their perceptual character, or the conviction that they 
represent something of external origin, varies fit>m case to case. 
Zucker has made experiments by trjdng to imitate a particular 
hallucination to see whether the patient could distinguish 
between their hallucination and the real perception of the 
attempted imitation. He found that, with the exception of 
certain toxic and delirious conditions, they could distinguish 
between the two quite readily. HaUudnations appear to be 
more obtrusive in character than perceptions, and tend to 
occupy the foreground of the patient’s mind, and to absorb 
his attention, ^herwise the frmt that patients are unable to 
disregard voices and other sensations that are practically 
meaningless could not be explained. 

The content of the haUucinations is determined to a 
varying extent by the past history of the patient concerned. 
Elementary hallucinations are more easily explained on a 
neurological level, but more complex hallucinations of visions 
and voices can often be traced, as regards content, to the 
previous experiences, attitude, views and fantasies of the 
particular patient. It is sometimes possible to distinguish the 
physiological from the psychological element in their pi^uction. 
Thus, delirium tremens j>atient8 usually see small and moving 
dots, as do patients with small scotomas. Their elaboration into 
rats, mice, or something else depends upon extra-sensory 
factors. Similarly, more complex hallucinations of cocaine 
addicts (cocaine bugs under the skin) are built around the 
nucleus of their tactile sensattons. In other instances it is not 
easy jto discovar a sensory element in Hie development of 
hiJlurinatory ejqDeriences, or any illuskmal basis, and it may be 
{Hr^erable to interpret '^eee experiences in tlw same way as 
dreams ; but no i^ysis of a i^graidiical type can exfdafri 



PSYCHIATRIC SYNDROMES 1001 

ihe fact that haUudnations occur at all. In order to explain 
this it is necessary to 'introduce factors that are not of a 
psychological type. 

Depenonalintion. — ^Deperaonalisation is “ a state in which 
the individual feels himself changed throughout in comparison 
with his former state. This change extends to both the 
patient and the outer world and leads to the individual not 
acknowledging himself as a personality. His actions seem to 
him automatic ; he observes his own actions like a spectator. 
The outer world seems strange to him, and has lost its 
character and reality ” (Paul Schilder). 

The sense of the outer world being changed is sometimes 
known as derealisation, as opposed to the feeling that the 
patient is himself changed, which constitutes depersonalisation 
in the more strict sense. Depersonalised patients complain of 
loss of feeling, whereas observation of their behaviour shows 
natural emotional responses. There are, however, cases when 
the subjective poverty of emotions is followed by objective 
“ affective loss.” 


PSYCHIATRIC SYNDROMES (REACTION TYPES) 

It is essential to remember that psychiatry deals with 
individuals, and hence with individvol reactions as varied as 
the nature and experiences of different individuals can make 
them. Consequently, as Adolf Meyer has pointed out, the 
problem of mental disorder is not exhausted by the attempted 
erection of categories of ” disease entities ” into which patients 
can be pigeon-holed from a diagnostic point of view. 

The question to be asked about a. psychiatric patient is 
not, therefore, ” What kind of mental disease has this patient 
got ? ” but rather, “ What type of reaction does this individual 
show, and how can we understand it ? ” And we can only 
understand it by studying the individual, his history, and his 
environment from many angles. 

In modem psychiatry, therefore, the older conception, 
taken over from general medicine, of rather rigid and clearly 
defined “ disease entities ” has been replaced by the broader 
and more elastic conception of ” reaction types ” or “ psychiatric 
syndromes ” ; for, although sm infinite number of individual 
varieties must be reoognis^, certain broad patterns of morbid 
response can be discerned. 

A syndrome is a complex of symptoms that tend firequentiiy 
to be found in association. 



1002 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


Thus, catatonic symptoms are not evidence of a disease 
catatonia,” but are symptoms that* may, for example, be 
seen in organic t37pes of reaction, and also, much more 
frequently, in schizophrenic types of reaction. 

There is often considerable overlapping of the various 
syndromes, so that one or more symptoms may be common to 
several types of mental disease. 

Psyehiatrio Olassiflcation. — ^It was not infrequent in the past 
to consider the neuroses as quite distinct from the psychoses. 
This sharp distinction is erroneous in theory and misleading 
in practice. In the classification that follows the neuroses are 
included as subdivisions of one of the three main groups. 

1. The Organic Reaction Type. — The main features are 
disturbances of consciousness and dementia. Organic factors 
are of predominant importance in the production of this type 
of reaction, which may be subdivided into clouded consciousness, 
delirium, Korsakow syndrome, hallucinosis and twilight states, 
and dementia. 

The various organic causes wliich may result in the develop- 
ment of these subdivisions of the main organic reaction type 
will be discussed later. 

2. The Schizophrenic Reaction Type. — The main features are 
progressive introversion, splitting of personality, and paranoid 
symptoms. The meaning of these terms will be discussed 
later. This reaction type occurs mainly as' the result of the 
operation of constitutional factors, and may be subdivided 
into simple hebephrenic, catatonic, and paranoid varieties. 

3. The Affective Reaction Ty^. — ^The main features are 
swings of mood, or abnormal mental and physical reactions 
to emotions, or both combined. 

Constitutional or psychological factors, or both, are usually 
predominant in the production of this reaction type, which may 
be divided into manic and depressive states, anxiety states, 
and hysterical and obsessional reactions. 


SCHEME OF EXAMINATION 

It is just as important in psychiatry as in general medicine 
to have a scheme of examination ; for unless a systematic 
scheme of examination is followed, important aspects and 
problems may be missed. 

It must, however, be remembered that in psychiatiy a 
good deal of elastidty is necessary in following such a aifoeme. 
Eor It is not only essential to try to establish a satiidifketory 



SCHEME OF EXAMINATION 1003 

oontaot (rapport) in the course of the examination, but the 
examiner must also attempt to gain an impression of the 
total personality of the patient. 

The following items are suggested : Name, age, sex ; single, 
married, divoro^ ; occupation ; addresses of patient and often 
also of correspondents, employers, doctors, relations ; telephone 
numbers. Details of complaint and careful chronological history 
of present illness, obtained from patient and friends. Importance 
of independent accounts. See relatives first and separately. 

Personal History. — History of early development ; birth 
injuries ; whether brought up by parents or not ; the home 
atmosphere ; relationship to father, mother and other members 
of the family ; dates of walking and talking ; neurotic traits 
such as fear of the dark, stuttering, thumb-sucking, nail-biting, 
enuresis, sleep-walking, nightmares. Sleeping arrangements. 
School record : scholastic attainments, keenness in games, 
sociability, homesickness. Work record : jobs held, why taken 
on, how long held, reasons for leaving, financial returns. Past 
health: previous physical diseases or attacks of mental ill- 
health or “ nerve ” trouble. Liability to faint, blush, sweat, 
tremble. Effects of medical contacts, use and abuse of drugs, 
attitude towards health matters and bodily disturbance. Social 
and sex : attitude towards relations and friends. Sex informa- 
tion and development : sexual experiences, menstruation, 
menopause, marriage, pregnancies, contraceptive measures. 

Interests, hobbies, ambitions. Legal difficulties including 
early tendency to lying or stealing. Religious and political 
tendencies. Fads and physical culture notions. Successes and 
disappointments, difficulties and quarrels. How spare time is 
employed, what makes life worth living. 

Personality Traits. — Actions and attitudes indicating that 
patient was sensitive, shy, reserved, solitary, shut-in, day- 
dreamer, sociable, active, friendly, affectionate, adaptable or 
not, stubborn, obstinate, suspicious, jealous, fnmk, moody, 
restless, dissatisfied, irritable, impulsive, cheerful, anxious, 
apprehensive, conscientious, neat, orderly, meticulous, efficient, 
cruel, stingy, hypochondriacal, eager to have sympathy, 
“ martyred,” aggressive, submissive, a leader, a follower, setf- 
oonfident, apt to feel inferior, religious, ethical, moral, interested 
in the abstract and in “ right and wrong.” 

Family History. — ^Nervous and mental illness, epilepsy, 
alcoholism, drug addiction, personality traits of relatives, 
llfoodinees, seclusiveneBS, successes, failures. Suicides. Hos- 
pitaUsaUon. Sodal amd cultural standing. 

Status. — (a) Appearance and Behaviour : Rapport, 



1004 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

&dal and bodily expreasion, condition of hair and clothing ; 
manners, gestures, mannerisms, grimacing. Tremor, rest- 
lessness, agitation. Co-operation, <^traotil^ty ; spontmieity 
in speech and action. 

(b) Talk : The form of the patient’s utterances rather than 
their content is here considered. Does he say much or little, 
talk spontuieously or only in answer, slow or fast, hesitantly 
or promptly, to the point or beside it, coherently, discursively, 
loosely, with interruptions, sudden silences, changes of topic, 
comments on happenings and things at hand, appropriately, 
using strange words or syntax, puns ? How does the form of 
his talk vary with its subject ? 

(c) Mood : The patient’s appearance may be described, so 
far as it is indicative of his mood. His answers to “ How do 
you feel in yourself ? ” “ What is your mood ? ” “ How 
about your spirits ? ” or some similar inquiry should be 
recorded. Many varieties of mood may be present — ^not merely 
happiness or sai^ess, but such states as irritability, suspicion, 
fear, unreality, worry, restlessness, bewilderment, indifference, 
and many more which it is convenient to include under this 
heading. 

Obmrve the constancy of the mood, the influences which 
change it ; the appropriateness of the, patient’s apparent 
emotional state to what he says. 

(d) Ddusions and Misinlerpretations : What is the patient’s 
attitude to the various people and things in his environment ? 
Does he misinteipret what happens, give it special or false 
meaning, or is he doubtful about it ? Does he think anyone 
pays special attention to him, treats him in a special way, 
jiersecutes him or influences him bodily or mentally, in ordinary 
or sdentific or supernatural ways ? laughs at him t shuns 
him ? admires him ? tries to kill, harm, annoy him ? Does 
he depreciate himself in any way, his morals, possessions, 
health ? Has he gnmdiose beliefs ? 

(e) HaUwinationa and othar DUordera of Perception : The 
source, vividness, reality, manner of reception, contoat and 
all ot^ (drcumstances of the experiences are important ; 
its content, espedally if auditory or visual, must be reported 
in detail.* When do these exporiences occur, at night, when 
filing asle^, when alone ? What is the patirait’s own 
explanation ? Any peculiar bodily sensatfons ; < fodingi of 
deadness t 

(f) Compulsive Phenomena : Obsessional thoughts, inolin4- 
tions or acts. Are they foH to be from without or part of the 
paint’s own mind ? Relation to his mnotional state : does 



SCHEME OF EXAMINATION 1006 

he repeat actions onneoessarily, such as washing, to reassure 
himself ? Phobias and anxiety. 

(g) Orientation : Record the patient’s answers to questions 
about his own name and identity, the place where he is, the 
time of day and the date. 

(h) Memory: This may be tested by comparing the patient’s 
account of his life with that given by others, or examining his 
account for intrinsic evidence of gaps or inconsistencies, '^ere 
should be special inquiry for recent events such as those of 
his admission to hospital and happenings in the ward since, 
or his journey to hospital or consulting room. Selective im- 
pairment of memory for special incidents, periods, recent or 
remote happenings. 

Record the patient’s successes or failure in grasping, 
retaining, and being able to recall spontaneously or on demand, 
three or five minutes later, a number, a name and address, or 
other data. Give the patient a short story to read and ask * 
him to repeat it in his own words. Give him digits forwards 
and then backwards, and record how many he can repeat 
immediately after being told them. A normal person should 
be able to repeat at least seven forwards and five backwards. 

(i) Concentration: Subtraction of serial sevens from a 
himdied (give answers and time taken). Telling the months 
of the year forwards and backwards. 

(j) Oraep of General Information : Tests for general infor- 
mation and grasp, as well as for ability to calculate, should be 
varied according to the patient’s educational level, and his 
experiences and interests. Suitable questions are : — 

Name of the King, and his immediate predecessors. 

The Prime Minister. 

The Chancellor of the Exchequer. 

([Capitals of France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Scotland. 

Six large cities in Britain. 

Date of beginning and end of the last War. 

These tests are not intended so much to estimate general 
intelligence as to see whether there has been any falling away 
from the patient’s former presumptive level of ^owle(^ and 
capacity, which has to be estimated fix)m his life history and 
independent information. 

(k) “ InUMigence Testa ; Standardised tests of intelligenoe 
are discussed in the section on Mental Deficiency (see p. 1021). 
The signs of intellectual deterioration will be found on page 998. 
The best estimate of the patient’s intelligenoe may be gained 
by going over his school and work record and by discussing 



1006 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


with him his job tmd his hobbies. Simple olinioal tests are 
provided by the definition of abstract words, e.g., “ envy ” md 
“ surprise ” ; by the explanation of proverbs, e.g., “ the early 
bird catches the worm ” ; and by the explanation of differences, 
e.g., dwarf and child, or idleness and laziness. 

A simple story may be told to see whether the patient grasps 
the point. 

Specimen Story. — The Donkey Loaded with Salt : A donkey, 
loaded with salt, had to wade a stream. He fell down, emd for 
a few minutes lay comfortably in the cool water. When he 
got up he felt relieved of a great part of his burden, because 
the stdt had melted in the water. Longears noted this advan- 
tage, and at once applied it the following day, when, loaded 
with sponges, he again went through the same stream. 

This time he fell, purposely, but was grossly deceived. The 
sponges had soaked up the water, and were considerably 
heavier than before. The burden was so great that he 
succumbed. 

The same remedy does not apply to all cases. 

(1) “ Insight ” ; This is best obtained by the questions as 
to whether the patient regards himself as being ill ; what he 
regards as being the nature of his illness (whether physical or 
“ nervous ” or both) and whether he thinJ^ he will get well. 


TREATMENT 

Oeneral Medical Treatment. — ^The treatment of the various 
conditions of physical disorder and disease that may be relevant 
to psychiatric problems must be sought elsewhere, and the more 
specific forms of treatment that are now employed for special 
forms of mental disease insulin in schizophrenia)- wiU be 
dealt with later in the appropriate sections. 

Only some general methods of symptomatic treatment, 
that are applicable in many conditions without reference to 
the special tjqie of the reaction or its aetiology, will be 
considered below. 

Drugs . — ^Drugs are mainly used to decrease anxiety, 
agitation, restlessness, and excitement, and to procure sleep. 

For acute excitement and restlessness, hyoscine (xiv bo 
gr.) combined with morphia to ^ gr.) can be very valuable ; 
but it must be remembered that hyoscine produces dryness 
of the mouth and anaesthesia (with its effect upon resjuration}, 
and hence great nursing care is necessary, 

. Continuous narcosis may be indicated in states of prolonged 



TREATMENT 


1007 


agitation and excitement. The object of this treatment is to 
keep the patient asleep for sixteen to twenty-two hours a day, 
for a period of from five to ten days. The technique employed 
varies in different centres, but usually Somnifaine (2 to 3 c.c., 
b.d.) is given by intramuscular injection at 9 a.h. and again 
between 4 and 7 p.m. When necessary paraldehyde is given 
in the interval, either by the mouth or by recttim. The times, 
just before the injection, when the patients are relatively 
awake, are used for nursing care (bowels, food and fiuid, 
temperature, blood pressure, urine examination, etc.). It is 
essential that the patient should receive sufficient nourish- 
ment, and that it should possess the necessary caloric value. 

Continuous narcosis is not a form of treatment that should 
be undertaken without previous practical experience. It has 
very great value in many of the acute reactions of war time. 

For lesser degrees of anxiety and restlessness bromides may 
be of value, but the danger of bromide intoxication should 
always be borne in mind, as this may occur even with small 
doses if continued for a long time, especially in elderly or 
arteriosclerotic patients. Bromide and chloral hydrate is an 
excellent combination ; the latter is an excellent sedative and 
hypnotic, and is not cumulative in its effects. The barbiturates 
are also of value in states of tension. Barbital (veronal) given 
in divided doses of 2J gr. b.d. or t.d.s., often gives relief if the 
state of anxiety or tension is not too severe. Some patients 
also find the barbiturates useful to fortify themselves when 
likely to be confronted witli a difficult situation. 

Tincture of opium (dose 5 minims t.d.s., increasing by 1 minim 
daily up to 16 minims t.d.s.) may be given, under careful 
supervision, for endogenous depression with much anxiety. 

For sleeplessness paraldehyde, were it not for its unpleasant 
taste and smell, would be the ideal hypnotic, for it is safe, 
powerful, and acts quickly. It can be given by mouth in 
2-drachm doses or 4 drachms by rectum. Many of the 
barbiturates are also excellent : perhaps Luminal (1 to 3 gr.) 
and Medinal (6 to 10 gr.) are the most commonly used. 

It is important to give barbiturates in sufficient doses, and 
to be ready to change them if individual intolerance is shown ; 
and it is often wise to combine them, i.e., to order one that 
induces sleep rapidly with another that has a more prolonged 
effect (Evipan and Nembutal plus Veronal or Luminal). 

In prescribing hypnotics it is, of course, essential to discover 
whether the trouble lies in going off to sleep (as in anxiety 
states), or in waking up early (as in a depr^sive state), or in 
both (as in mixed states), and to prescribe accordingly. 



1008 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

Bromide is not a hypnotic ; but may help to induce sleep 
by decreasing worry and restlessness. 

Sodium Amytal has great interest in the treatment of 
stupors, and a^r a suitable intrarenous dose (0*5 grm.), 
patients who have been mute and resistive for weeks and 
months wiU often begin to talk spontaneously, to answer 
questions, and to carry out orders. With larger doses, patients 
fall asleep after a period of responsiveness ; hence daily injec- 
tions of the drug have been suggested with the hope of combining 
‘the benefit of a continuous narcosis with periods of accessibility, 
that might be utilised for psycho-therapeutic purposes. 

It is difficult to assess the results that have b^n claumed ; 
but certainly there is some danger of the development of 
epileptic fits after a sudden withdrawal. 

!^nzedrine (5 to 20 mg.) has been used as a direct 
stimulant in patients with lassitude, depr^ion, and retarda- 
tion. 

Oeneral Management and Nnning Care. — Cases of major 
psychoses, especially when acute, should be confined to b^. 
Milder degrees of tension and restlessness also frequently 
respond well to this simple measure. Continuous baths at 
body temperature are indicated in severer forms of restlessness 
and excitement, though some now question their usefulness. 

Padded rooms or cells are seldom used in modem mental 
hospitals, but were formerly employed in cases of severe 
excitement not otherwise controllable. It could be urged that 
they had a definite value for a certain t 3 q)e of case, and 
perbajw would still be used were it not for their unfortunate 
appearance and reputation. 

It is often advisable to treat patients in single rooms rather 
than in large wards, for certain depressed patients are distressed 
by the noise made by other patients, and excitable patients 
are unduly stimulated and distracted by company. Separation, 
however, makes supervision and observation more difficult, and 
the treatmmit of suicidal patients in single rooms demands a 
large staff. 

The ingenuity and inventiveness of potential guicidea can 
never be overestimated. Some of the dangers can be guarded 
against by suitable planning and construction of the building, 
mid by the adoption of certain measures in ward routine ; 
but strict mid constant supervision, combined with knowledge 
of the individual patient, me probably the most effective 
measures. o//ood, or of sufficient fiiod, is common in 

mental disordms, and may be a disguised form of suiddid 
attempt. If it is impossible to induce the patient to tal» 



TREATMENT 1009 

sufficient nourishment by other means, recourse should be had 
to tube feeding without undue delay. Certain patients who 
do not refuse food entirely, underfeed themselves systemat- 
ically. It is essential to keep an exact weight chart and, if 
necessary, to start tube feeding should the weight continue to 
drop. 

The question of diet has probably not gained the position 
in psychiatry that it deserves. Weir Mitchell cures ” (rest 
and a very plentiful diet rich in carbohydrates) can be of great 
value in neurasthenic states of exhaustion, and during 
convalescence from psychoses. “ Modified ’’ insulin treatment 
(i.e., using doses not causing unconsciousness, but only leading 
to very slight hypoglycaemia) has a similar effect. Patients 
with depressive or anxiety states who show marked loss of 
weight can be given, with benefit, daily “ subcomatose ” doses 
of insulin. The rest and the increased intake of carbohydrate 
produces a striking improvement in the physical condition, 
often accompanied by an improvement m the mental state. 

Finally, many patients tend to be constipated, and it is 
essential to make sure that the bowels have been properly 
evacuated. 

Psychological Treatment and Psychotherapy 

It haw already been emphasised that the psychological 
effects of past experiences play an important part in every 
abnormal mental reaction. Environmental factors do not 
cease to operate after the onset of mental disorder, but continue 
to exert a profound influence. 

It should be remembered that psychotherapy, as the term is 
genercdly imderstood, is only one example of an environmental 
influence that may produce a beneficial psychological effect, and 
that there are other extremely important methods of giving 
treatment that must be regarded as psychological treatment. 

In these methods of psychological treatment the object is 
to modify environmental factors in order to provide satis- 
factory environmental conditions anil opportunities, rather 
than to deal entirely with the individual ; teth these methods 
of approach should always be combined. 

It should be reoognis^ that these other methods of psycho- 
logical treatment may be safer, quicker, cheaper, technically 
easier, and that their results may last longer than treatment 
by major psychotherapy alone^; but, of course, in order to 
employ them correctly it is essential to have a thorough 
knowl^ge of the problems of the individual concerned. 

64 



1008 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

Bromide is not a hypnotic ; but may help to induce sleep 
by decreasing worry and restlessness. 

Sodium AmyUd has great interest in the treatment of 
stupors, and after a suitable intravenous dose (0*5 gnu.), 
patients who have been mute and resistive for weeks and 
months will often begin to talk spontaneously, to answer 
questions, and to carry out orders. With larger doses, patients 
fall asleep after a period of responsiveness ; hence daily injec- 
tions of the drug have been suggested with the hope of combining 
‘the benefit of a continuous narcosis with periods of accessibility, 
that might be utilised for psycho-therapeutic purposes. 

It is difficult to assess the results that have been claimed ; 
but certainly there is some danger of the development of 
epileptic fits after a sudden withdrawal. 

l^nzedrine (5 to 20 mg.) has been used as a direct 
stimulant in patients with lassitude, depression, and retarda- 
tion. 

General Management and Nursing Care. — Cases of major 
psychoses, especially when acute, should be confined to bed. 
Milder degrees of tension and restlessness also frequently 
respond well to this simple measure. Continuous baths at 
body temperature are indicated in severer forms of restlessness 
{md excitement, though some now question their usefulness. 

Padded rooms or cells are seldom used in modem mental 
hospitals, but were formerly employed in cases of severe 
excitement not otherwise controllable. It could be urged that 
they had a definite value for a certain type of case, and 
perhaps would still be used were it not for their unfortunate 
appearance and reputation. 

It is often advisable to treat patients in single rooms rather 
than in large wards, for certain depressed patients are distressed 
by the noise made by other patients, and excitable patients 
are unduly stimulated and distracted by company. Separation, 
however, makes supervision and observation more difficult, and 
the treatment of suicidal patients in single rooms demands a 
large staff. 

The ingenuity and inventiveness of potential euicides can 
never be overestimated. Some of the dangers can be guarded 
against by suitable planning and construction of the building, 
and by the adoption of certain measures in ward routine ; 
but strict mid constant supervision, combined with knowledge 
of the individual patient, ate probably the most effective 
measures. Befuaal of food, or of sufficient food, is common in 
mental disorders, and may be a disguised form of suicidal 
attempt. If it is impossible to induce the patient to tc^ 



TREATMENT 


1009 


sufficient nourishment by other means, recourse should be had 
to tube feeding without undue delay. Certain patients who 
do not refuse food entirely, underfeed themselves systemat- 
ically. It is essential to keep an exact weight chart and, if 
necessary, to start tube feeding should the weight continue to 
drop. 

The question of diet has probably not gained the position 
in psychiatry that it deserves. ‘‘ Weir Mitchell cures ” (rest 
and a very plentiful diet rich in carbohydrates) can be of great 
value in neurasthenic states of exhaustion, and during 
convalescence from psychoses. ‘‘ Modified ” insulin treatment 
(t.c., using doses not causing unconsciousness, but only leading 
to very slight hypoglycaemia) has a similar effect. Patients 
with depressive or anxiety states who show marked loss of 
weight can be given, with benefit, daily “ subcomatose ” doses 
of insulin. The rest and the increased intake of carbohydrate 
produces a striking improvement in the physical condition, 
often accompanied by an improvement in the mental state. 

Finally, many patients tend to be constipated, and it is 
essential to make sure that the bowels have been properly 
evacuated. 

Psychological Treatment and Psychotherapy 

It has already been emphasised that the psychological 
effects of past experiences play an important part in every 
abnormal mental reaction. Environmental factors do not 
cease to operate after the onset of mental disorder, but continue 
to exert a profound influence. 

It should be remembered that psychotherapy, as the term is 
generally understood, is only one example of an environmental 
influence that may produce a beneficial psychological effect, and 
that there are other extremely important methods of giving 
treatment that must be regarded as psychological treatment. 

In these methods of psychological treatment the object is 
to modify environmental factors in order to provide satis- 
factory environmental conditions and opportunities, rather 
than to deal entirely with the individual ; ^th these methods 
of approach should always be combined. 

It should be recognis^ that these other methods of psycho- 
logical treatment may be safer, quicker, cheaper, technically 
easier, and that their results may last longer than treatment 
by major psychotherapy alone.; but, of course, in order to 
^ploy them correctly it is essential to have a thorough 
knowledge of the problems of the individual concerned. 

64 



1010 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

Oeneral Psychological Management. — The Immediate En- 
vironment . — Even severe and chronic psychoses respond to 
changes in their environment, such as being transferred from 
one ward to another, or from one hospital to another. The 
insistence on personal cleanliness and manners has a profoimd 
effect even upon the behaviour of deteriorated patients. 
Milder cases are even more susceptible to the influence of 
their surroundings. 

Admission to a hospital involves, apart from anything else, 
a sudden and complete change of environment ; and how 
fundamental a change in the clinical picture may result from 
this simple measure strikes even the experienced psychiatrist 
again and again. After admission, the greatest care should be 
devoted to the question of which ward the patient should be 
in, or whether he would be better in a single room ; and as to 
whether he is influenced in a favourable or unfavourable way 
by another patient, or by a particular nurse. In brief, the. 
reaction of the patient to his environment must be studied 
most carefully and the desirable alterations made in so far 
as that is possible ; and it is possible to a surprising extent. 

Occupational Therapy, which is of cardinal importance in 
the treatment of mental disorder, is based on the elementary 
principle that it is a good thing for everybody, including 
patients, to have something to do. The name is perhaps 
unfortunate as tending to emphasise the aspect of filling in 
time, whereas stress should be laid on the far more important 
aspects of relieving unhappiness or discomfort by distraction, 
affording an opportimity for the recovery df real pleasure in 
activity, increasing self-confidence by tangible evidence of a 
capacity that had been doubted, and often enough frank 
training in better habits of concentration and work. 

Patients suffering from mental disorders often experience 
difficulty in making decisions, lack self-confidence and initiative, 
and show a loss of interest, except perhaps in their own 
symptoms. To ask such patients to plan their day, and to fill 
in their time as they think best, is not merely to ask something 
that is stupid and unfair, but it is to permit something that 
may be positively harmful. 

Consequently, a carefully planned day, with facilities for 
the development and enjoyment of as many interests as 
possible, should form an ^sential part of the life in every 
modem mental hospital ; and the same principle of careful 
individual planning of the best “ twenty-four-hour day ” that 
can be worked out should be applied to psychiatric patients 
who are not in mental hoi^itals. 



TREATMENT 1011 

“ Occupational therapy ” is not achieved by suggesting a 
little knitting as an alternative to brooding, or the depressing 
comparison of rival discomforts with other patients. It should 
be definitely organised ; thus, for example, patients should 
be made to go to “ occupational classes ” for various handi- 
crafts. But games and entertainments are just as much a 
part of an occupational scheme as raffia work or carpentry, 
and there are other forms of valuable, practical, and interesting 
activities besides indulgence in the arts and crafts. 

Environmental Adjustment and Social Work . — In the treat- 
ment of out-patients, as well as in hospital cases, a great deal 
may be accomplished by “ social work ” of various kinds. 
The {distance of trained social workers is of the greatest 
value for this purpose ; and many of the activities of a good 
general practitioner are essentially of this nature. All 
practitioners would be wise both to acquaint themselves with, 
and to avail themselves of, the social service facilities in 
their neighbourhood, such as welfare organisations, clubs, and 
recreational opportunities. 

It is necessary to establish conta.ct with relations, friends, 
and employers in order to get to know, and, if possible, to 
adjust conditions both at home and at work in a more 
satisfactory manner ; not infrequently as much can be done 
by explanation and advice to those with whom the patient 
lives, or with whom he comes into contact, as by a more 
di^ct approach to the patient himself. 

Occupational maladjustment becomes a serious problem 
when men are forced by economic conditions, or by their call 
up for the Services, to undertake work for which they are not 
fitted. Psychological selection, taking into consideration not 
only the individual’s general intelligence and special aptitudes, 
but also his temperament and character, can do much to reduce 
this source of mental ill-health, and also if it has suffered, to 
restore it. 

Minor Psychotherapy. — In many instances, quite simple 
explanation and discussion of the problems, and of the nature 
and origin of the illness, may effect great improvement. The 
patient may be given direct advice so far as certain personal 
and social difficulties are concerned ; but it is preferable to 
do this indirectly, by helping the patient to make his own 
decisions. Sexual problems, at the time of puberty or after 
marriage, or fears of pregnancy, and subsequent neurotic 
reactions, can frequently be dealt with by explanation- and 
instruction, or by referring the patient .to a birth-control 
oiinic. 



1012 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

The Buggestive influence of the personality of the doctor, 
and of the atmosphere of the hospital or consrdting room, are 
factors that are difficult to assess in any kind of mescal 
treatment. Deliberate use can be made of these influences 
in treating minor psychological troi^bles. So-called indirect 
suggestion by means of the electric current or inert medicines 
is not a very desirable way of carrying out psychological 
treatment ; but it can be very effective, and if it is done 
conscientiously, and followed up by or combined with explana- 
tion and reassurance or whatever may be necessary, it may be 
a time-saving method. 

Persuasion, though sometimes thought to be a method of 
influencing the patient by reasoning, always contains a large 
element of suggestion. 

The most striking method of treatment by suggestion is 
hypnosis, which is a sleep-like state in which the contact 
between physician and patient (rapport) is not interrupted. 
A person in a hypnotic state is particularly susceptible to 
suggestion ; and it is possible by hypnosis to influence many 
physical and mental functions that are not within the control 
. of the will. 

It is not possible to detail here the various methods of 
inducing a hypnotic state, but it must be remembered that 
only a proportion of mankind can be hypnotised. The 
therapeutic application of hypnosis is limited even for these. 
It is, however, an excellent method of removing hysterical 
symptoms, such as blindness, aphonia, pareses, or amnesia. 
The removal of a hysterical gait in a single session provides one 
of the most striking successes that a psychotherapist can have. 
Some patients, otherwise refractory to hypnosis, can be readily 
hypnotised after a moderate dose of a hypnotic. A further 
development is the production of a drowsy suggestible state 
by the administration of evipan or sodium amytal intravenously. 
This “ narco -analysis ” has proved particularly useful in the 
clearing up of psychogenic states of loss of memory, and it is 
also a convenient time-saving method for removing hysterical 
conversion symptoms. 

Major Psychotherapy.— -The more complex abnormal mental 
reactions constitute the main field of major psychotherapy. 

Neurotic illnesses of long standing always tend to become 
increasingly complex, for with the passage of time, neiuotic 
reactions give rise to new problems, which again become the 
source of new conflicts and difficulties. The task of trying 
to achieve continued readaptations to difficult circumstances 
often necessitates changes of attitude and sacrifices of desires. 



TREATMENT 1013 

ambitions, and convictions. This may result in conscious 
inconsistency and strain, or repression and self-deception. 

Conflicts involving deep-seated religious, moral, and social 
standards are not likely to yield to suggestive therapy or 
environmental adjustment in lidghly differentiated individuals, 
and may therefore demand more prolonged psychological 
treatment. 

Strangely enotigh, psychotherapists have separated them- 
selves from the rest of psychiatry, and occupy a position to 
which there is no equivalent in any other branch of medicine — 
hsemotherapists, or perhaps rather ferro-hsemo therapists, are 
unknown. This may have arisen partly owing to the large 
amount of time and concentration required for prolonged 
psychological treatment, but is probably due mainly to ihe 
formation of special psychotherapeutic schools, each of which 
has developed not only a technique but a doctrine of its own. 

Psycho-analysis, based on Sigmund Freud’s pioneer work 
on the study of the individual neurotic patient, has outgrown 
its character as a method of treatment, and has become a 
school of philosophy and psychology, whose pupils also carry 
out psychotherapy, but only according to the strict rules of 
their order. The ideas of Freud, whether accepted or rejected, 
have given a great stimulus to psychiatric work. Their 
therapeutic application must be studied in the books of the 
master and his pupils, and the real technique is only available 
to the formally initiated. It is difficult to assess the results 
that have been claimed, for so few have been published, but 
they do not seem to be better than those achieved by less 
laborious and expensive methods. 

The schools of Adler and Jung are offsprings of the 
Freudian psycho-analysis, whose legitimacy is not accepted by 
the parent. The student who takes a special interest in them 
must also be referred to the larger textbooks, but would do 
better to consult the works of those authors themselves. 

The psychotherapy of the neuroses should always be based 
on some general principles, which can merely be outlined 
here very briefly. Psychotherapeutic technique can be learnt 
as little from books as can surgical technique. 

The first step in any form of psychotherapy must be to 
obtain a careful and detailed history. It is essential to collect 
information from all possible sources, such as relatives and 
friends, in order to supplement and to correct the acooimt 
given by the patient hims elf. The collection of facts should 
precede attempts to interpret them ; and the elucidation of 
the more fundamental problems that lie behind the overt 



1014 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

complaint or complaints is only possible in the light of these 
facts. At the same time it must be borne in mind that good 
history taking inevitably involves therapeutic work. The 
opportunity of talking about intimate matters to an impartial 
witness is often felt as a great relief. The interviews with the 
doctor leads the patient to a more systematic survey of his 
difficulties. He has to formulate his problem in words, and by 
this very process they often become more clear, and can be 
viewed more objectively. 

It is often possible, during even the preliminary period of 
history taking, to remove at least some of the manifest 
symptoms by reassmanoe, suggestion, or other form of 
symptomatic treatment ; and this may enable the patient to 
face his other difficiilties and problems with greater ease. 

It is useful to have in mind a list of important topics in 
order to arrange in a systematic manner the material that must 
be collected in a more detailed analysis of the patient’s 
personality. Diethelm suggests the following headings : — 

1. Intellectual resources. 

2. Emotional tendencies and temperament. 

3. Volition and action tendencies, interests, andstrivings. 

4. Standards. 

6. Attitude to the body and to the'instinctite desires. 

6. Attitude to material needs. 

7. Attitude to oneself and ability to deal with oneself. 

8. Social needs and adjustment to the group. 

9. Assets and handicaps and personality synthesis. 

There are various methods of ascertaining and of making 
the patient aware of the psychological factors which, for his 
own good reasons, he has removed from the centre of his 
consciousness. The choice as to whether hypnosis, free 
association, and dream analysis are used to supplement 
systematic questioning will depend upon the personal technique 
of the physician, on the nature of the particular problem, and 
upon the necessary economy of time. 

The more active part of treatment begins with the explana- 
tion and interpretation of the symptoms. These, if possible, 
the patient should be guided to find and elucidate for him- 
self. He is thus gradually led to a more just appreciation 
of the true nature of his problems and as to how ^ey arose ; 
and it is weU to try to discover potential assets that have 
not been properly utilised, and not only to dwell on the 
mistakes that have been made or the defidendes that have 
been shown. 



CONSTITUTIONAL ANOMALIES 


1016 


Some schools of psychotherapy teach that the mere dis- 
entanglement of the origin of difficulties has a curative effect. 
Lack of therapeutic success is ascribed to lack of depth of the 
analysis, and this leads to attempts to find the ‘‘ essential ’’ 
cause in the increasingly remote past. 

This “ buried treasure ’’ school of psychopathology, the 
simple faith in the original psychic trauma which explains 
aU and which, if unearthed, leads to cure, is, in its extreme 
form, a small one ; but in modified forms, it is perhaps still 
all too common. It must always be remembered that the 
psychologically comprehensible is not necessarily the same as 
the causally significant (see p. 984), and that understanding 
of the remote past does not necessarily confer control of the 
present. The majority of experts agree that another synthetic 
and constructive part of treatment has to follow. To gain a 
more just appreciation of the origin and the nature of the 
problems and to be able to assume a more detached attitude 
towards them means some progress ; but in order to solve 
them more is needed. The majority of patients need to develop 
new attitudes and new ways of attacking their difficulties before 
they can deal with their particular situation. 

Only a minority of patients, or indeed of mankind, are able 
to develop a philosophy of their own ; and, therefore, the 
majority are more willing to accept a ready-made system and 
faith. These are offered not only by religion but by the various 
schools of psychotherapy and their adherents. The rapport 
developed in the course of prolonged psychotherapy often makes 
the patient accept the views and attitudes of his physician, 
be that intended or not. It must be the final object to loosen 
the patient’s attachment again to such an extent that he is 
able to adopt his new insight and philosophy as truly his own, 
and to stand on his own feet. 

For further information, “ Treatment in Paychiatry,” by Oscar Diethelm, 
New York, 1936 (MacMillan Co.), is recommended. 


CONSTITUTIONAL ANOMALIES 

Personality, as that term is used here, comprises both 
intelligence and character. The personality of the patient is 
a veiy important factor both in producing and in colouring 
abnormal mental states. Instincts are the driving forces that 
play an important part in determining the type of personality. 
Anomalies in tl^ sphere are therefore responsible for many 
anomalies in the make-up of the individual. 



1016 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

It is possible to outline only a few types of anomalies of 
instinct and of abnormal characters liable to become psychiatric 
problems. Our knowledge of intellectual deficiency (mental 
defect) is more advanced. This is no doubt partly beoaim 
the practical importance of the problems raised by mental 
defect is more obvious and striking. 

Anomalies of Instincts. — ^Although anomalies of the sexual 
instinct are probably the most frequent, it must not be forgotten 
that anomalies in other instincts, such as that of self-preserva- 
tion, may also be found. Thus, there are families in which a 
large proportion of the members die by their own hand. It is 
difficult to attribute this fact entirely to family example and 
family tradition, important though these may be. It seems more 
reasonable to assume that in such families ^e self-preservative 
instinct is constitutionally weak. 

Sexual Anomalies . — ^The student should have some know- 
ledge of normal sexual development, and of the intensity, 
fluctuations and variations of the sexual instinct in order to 
form an opinion about anomalies of time of onset, frequency 
and type of sexual activity ; and only very gross departures 
from what is statistically frequent should be regarded as 
abnormalities from the m^cal standpoint. 

Sexual immaturity is the most common sexual anomaly, 
which, though seldom calling for medical treatment in itself, 
can frequently be shown to be the foundation of many types 
of sexual maladaptation which do call for medical advice. 

Masturbation is a normal transitional stage of sexual 
development, but its persistence is often a symptom of 
immaturity. The incapacity to find a sexual partner may be 
only an expression of general developmental retardation. 
Sii^arly, frigidity in women is often a sign of, or results from, 
constitutional immaturity. The lack of desire for children may 
be due to the same cause. The under-development of the 
secondary sex-characters often suggests the constitutional 
origin of these psychological manifestations. 

The importance of constitutional factors in the production 
of homo-sexnaUty varies greatly. Homo-sexual tendencies 
may often be observed in various members of the same family. 
It may be found in men with a feminine ph3r8ique or in women 
with a masculine physique. Oh the other hand, many 
individuals who jn^viously showed no evidence of homo-sexu^ 
toodencies, indulge in homo-sexual practices when placed in 
special circumstances, such as on toard ship, or in {nison. 
Such individuals have clearly been influenced by example and 
seduction. Homo-sexual practices are not therefore the criterion 



CX)NSTrrUTIONAL ANOMALIES 1017 

of a homO'Sexual constitution, and the fact that the majority 
of homo-sexual prostitutes are hetero-sexual subjects proves 
this very strikingly. Again, many constitutional homo-sexuals 
never indulge in homo-sexual activities, in the strict sense, 
for fear of the legal or social consequences. 

The typical homo-sexual is soffc-natured, sensitive, and 
shy, and bia “ mother-fixation ” which is sometimes alleged 
to be the cause of his homo-sexuality, may be regarded 
as one feature of his character. The homo-sexual may show 
feminine traits, both in physique, gesture, and in his interests. 

The attraction to the same sex often seems to spring from 
the enthusiastic friendships so characteristic of the age of 
puberty, and when the relationship remains on this level, 
whether intentionally or unconsciously, most valuable and 
permanent friendships may result. But when abnormal 
sexuality is repressed, or when manifest conflicts with public 
opinion threaten, neurotic reactions often develop which bring 
the individual to the psychiatrist. It is not possible to describe 
abnormal sexual practices in detail, though they are of interest 
here because they so frequently possess a constitutional back- 
grotmd. The majority of them (exhibitionism, sadism, maso- 
chism, and so on) can be regarded as exaggerations of normal 
sexual features that become evident when the development of 
inhibitions and adaptation does not reach its ordinary level. 
These anomalies come under the care of the physician when 
they give risfe to conflicts with society, of if they become per- 
versions, i.6., when they dominate the sexual life instead of 
being part of it. It is a gross mistake to regard as perversions 
normal manifestations of sex. Thus to speak of infantile sadism 
and exhibitionism leads to wrong conceptions.* 

Abnormal Characters. — ^The schizoid character is not a 
uniform type. The abnormal characters found in the families 
of schizop^nics (which is the original meaning of the term 
schizoid) comprise shy, introverted, and seclud^ characters, 
nature-loving, abstract-minded, and idealistic, as well as 
cool, ruthless, remote, and egotistical individuals, and many 
of the queer, eccentric, and odd. The dreamy, bearded, 
be-sandidled denizen of Bloomsbury or Montmartre is often 
a schizoid, just as much as is the wild-eyed fanatical adherent 
of some political or religious sect. Pcucmoid features, either 
of the more aggressive or the more passive kind, are cdso 
common. There is some positive correlation between schizoid 
characters and an asthenic or athletic physique. 

* A flood faitrodaoiioii is ** PByohology of Sex : a Manual for Students.*’ 
Hsveloek EUis* William Heinemaim, London, 19S4. 



1018 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

Cydolhymic (cycloid) personalities frequently occur in the 
families of manic-depressives. They are exfraverted, good- 
natured, sociable, and adaptable. There is a strong positive 
correlation with the pyknic build : " the 16-in. ne^ in a 
14-in. collar.” 

An excitable, aggressive character is sometimes seen in 
epileptic patients, and it has therefore been suggested that 
these personalities should be called “ epileptoids.” The 
relationship to this disease is, Siowever, much less close than 
in the other two groups, and it seems preferable to speak of 
excitable or explosive types. These personalities are common 
in certain families, and may have a considerable importance 
in psychiatric practice, for criminality, suicide, and psycho- 
genic reactions of various kinds often develop on this 
constitutional background. 

. The hyaterical character should be clearly distinguished 
frt>m hysterical (conversion) s 3 nnptoms, for they may be 
observed independently of one ano^er. The cardinal feature 
of the hysterical character is the desire to appear more than 
he (or more frequently she) really is, with which is coupled a 
-striMng skill in self-deception. Hysterics are generally easily 
influenced by persons or ideas that appeal to them, and they 
have a remarkable capacity for identifying themselves with 
others, and for imitating them. Their emotions are easily 
roused, and they express l£eir willingness to dedicate themselves 
to various ideals, until their enthusiasm changes for something 
dse, which they then take up with the same conviction. The 
instability of their emotions, their vivid fantasy, and the 
adaptability of their minds make them untruthful and 
unreliable, although subjectively they feel quite candid, 
deceiving themselves much better than they usually deceive 
others. They are immature in their thinking and in their 
emotional reactions, and the sexual frigidity, which is very 
frequent, may be another expression of the same fact. They 
are often incapable of permanent affection or sexual relation- 
ships ; but they are good short-time flirts, and know how to 
dally with the other sex to satisfy their vanity. H 3 nsterioal 
conversion symptoms often provide the means by which they 
try to dominate their surroundings, with varying degrees of 
success. 

The obwasional (miancastio) character is not always traceable 
in the history of patients with obsessional neuroses, and 
obsessional traits are oftmi found in the early history of patients 
snfEering from other types of abnormal mental reaction. 
Obsessional features mce usually described as including exc^ve 



CONSTITUTIONAL ANOMALIES 1019 

cleanliness or tidiness, pedantry, conscientiousness, and incon- 
clusive ways of thinking and acting. It is only when these are 
accompanied by the feeling of subjective compiilsion that they 
become obsessional symptoms. The exaggerated concern with 
the regularity of the bowels or other excretory functions 
accounts for the name “ anal-erotic ” given to this type of 
character by the Freudian School. The obsessional character, 
as such, rarely gives occasion for psychiatric interference. 

The most common, but most vaguely defined abnormal 
character is the unstable psychopath, perhaps better described 
as the “ inadequate ” person. The most prominent features 
are poverty of will power -and determination, and this is 
generally shown best in the careers of such creatures. They 
are as debris upon the sea of life, floating from job to job and 
frequently submerged. It is striking to see how they can 
improve under strict guidance, not rarely under the thumb of 
a suitable wife . Unstable individuals of this type are candidates 
for all sorts of psychogenic reactions, and they often come 
imder psychiatric observation because of suicidal attempts. 
They Ml the ranks of minor criminals and prostitutes. They 
are often asthenic in physique, and get easily tired on 
physical effort ; their emotions do not go very deep, and 
change easily. 

The aggressive psychopath is generally seen because he 
“ loses his temper.” He may commit serious crimes of violence. 
Not every person who loses his temper should be regarded as 
a psychopath and the term should be used for a comparatively 
small group whose life history demonstrates that education, 
discipline, and punishment are ineffective in improving their 
powers of self-control. In some cases the aggressive anti-social 
behaviour shows periodic exacerbations. A considerable pro- 
portion of aggressive psychopaths show an abnormal electro- 
encephalogram, demonstrating the constitutional basis of their 
abnormality. 

ArUi-social psychopaths, or “ sociopaths,” are personalities 
who have not developed and seem inoa|>able of developing these 
social inhibitions which life in society imposes on the citizen. 
Many persons in the present population belong to this group. 

It is perhaps worth mentioning that Imdily anomsMes 
frequently coexist with the psychological anomalies in these 
abnormal characters and all the so-called nervous symptoms, 
such as tremor, restlessness, profuse sweating, vaso-motor 
lability with blushing and fainting, and an allergic disposition 
are frequently found combined with the psychopa^ic anomalies, 
though detailed correlations have yet to be made. The same 



1020 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

is true as re^gards morphological anomalies, often oaUed 
stigmata, asthenic build, disproportion in physique, imder- 
development of the secondary sexual characters, or hetero- 
sexual features. 


MiSNTAli DeFICIBNOY 

Mental deficiency means intellectual defect existing from 
birth, or from the early years of life. Legally it is defined as 
“ a condition of arrest^ or incomplete development of mind 
existing before the age of 18 years, whether arising from 
inherent causes or induced by disease or injury.” Amentia 
is a term used as a synonym ; - dementia, as opposed to it, 
means intellectual defect acquired later in life. Though mental 
deficiency should be clearly distinguished, on principle, from 
psychopathic anomalies-, there is no doubt that the vast 
majority of defectives also show anomalies in the sphere of 
emotion, volition, and instincis. On the other hand, a low 
intellectual level, even if not reaching legal deficiency, is always 
a serious complication of mental instability. 

Mental defectives are usually graded, according to their 
intellectual level, as idiots, iml^iles, and feeble-minded 
persons (moroiis). The following legal definitions are useful 
and sufficient for all practical purposes 

1 . Idiots. — “ Persons so deeply defective in mind from birth, 
or from an early age, as to 1^ unable to guard themselves 
against conunon physical dangers.” 

2. Imbeciles. — ” Persons in whose case there exists from 
birth or from an early age mental defectiveness not amounting 
to idiocy yet so pronounced that they are incapable of 
managing themselves or their affairs, or, in the case of children, 
of being taught to do so.” 

3. Feebk-minded or Morons. — “ Persons in whose case 
there exists fit>m birth or from an early age mental defective- 
ness not amounting to imbecility, yet so pronounced that they 
requite care, supervision, and control for their own protection, 
or for the protection of others, or, in the case of children, that 
they by reason of such defectiveness appear to be permanently 
incapable of receiving benefit from the instruction in ordinary 
schools.” 

4. Moral Imbeciles. — “ Persons who from an early age 
dis|day some pemument mentid defect coupled with stron|^y 
vicious or criminal propensities on which pimishment has had 
little or no deterrent effect.” 

]^w-grade defrctives, constituted by groups 1 and 2 above, 
vMy frequentiy show in addition phyrical abnormalities, and 



CONSTITUTIONAL ANOMALIES 1021 

a large variety of neurological symptoms. Apart from mas- 
turbation, idiots rarely show any sexual activity. This is of 
interest with regard to the question of their sterilisation. 

InteUigence tests, devised to grade normal and subnormal 
intelligence, are based on Binet-Simon’s method or standardised 
against tlieir scale. The Binet-Simon test consists of groups 
of questions, arranged for years of age, and standardised in 
such a way that a normal child is able to answer aU the 
questions of his age group. The extent to which the patient 
answers the questions correctly determines his “ Mental Age ” 
(M.A.). The M.A. divided by the actual age of the child 
and expressed as a percentage gives the IntelUgence Quotient 
(I.Q.). An I.Q. between 90 and 110 should be regarded 
as normal. 

There are many modifications and revisions of the original 
test ; non-verbal (performance) tests have been proved to be 
a useful supplement.* 

In an adult, a “ mental age ” under 3 is generally accepted as 
the limit of idiocy. But the lower the intellectual level, the 
more doubtful becomes the value of these tests. 

Imbecility is assumed up to a “ mental age ” of 7. This 
group also frequently show physical and especially neuro- 
logical symptoms . Speech is generally retarded and articulation 
is often poor. Emotional factors are most important in deter- 
mining the patients’ capacity for adjustment. Placid, manage- 
able, docile types may be trained to some sort of work in spite 
of a low intellectual level, whereas excitable, restless tyx>es of 
higher intellectual resources may remain permanent imnates 
of mental hospitals. Sexual activity may be possible, and 
female imbeciles often become prostitutes of the lowest classi 

Both imbecility and idiocy are often combined with 
epilejwy, t.e,, the underlying brain condition gives rise to both 
mental deficiency and epileptic fits. 

The diagnosis of a moron is more difficult, not so much 
in the distinction from imbecility (which is mainly a matter 
of nomenclature) but in the distinction from normality, 
especially “ normal ” stupidity. Once the idea has sirisen, it 
is not, of course, difficult to carry out suitable tests. But it is 
surprising how rarely the physician thinks of this diagnosis if 
he sees the patient, not in a psychiatric out-patient depart- 
ment, but in a general ward where he or she complains of 
peculiar sensations, or disturbs the other patients by behaving 

* For detaib of the whole qaesUon see : Burt» C., ** Mental and Sohcda^c 

TeatSy” liondon* 1922. Temum, L. M.» and Mezril^ A., Meaauiing 
London, 1937. 



1022 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

like a naughty or tiresome child. A consi(ierable proportion 
of those who seem maddeningly incapable of giving a straight- 
forwaurd or consistent history are morons, and h 3 rpochondriacal 
reactions are very frequent amongst them. 

Since the majority of morons live outside mental hospitals^ 
this class is of much greater medical and social importance than 
the other two. The same variations of character are foimd 
among morons as in normal persons ; but the intellectual defect, 
which is often coupled with poor powers of self-restraint or “ in- 
hibition ” often provides the backgroimd for certain anomalies 
of character, especially aggressiven^, criminal propensities, 
and sexual libertinism. The make-up of the individual moron 
may influence even the test results by means of which the 
intellectual level has to be gauged. Lack of interest, and of 
concentration and effort, may bring the results below the 
‘‘ potential ” intellectual level. Special disabilities, e.jr., 
in the field of speech, in reading, and in calculating, may 
have a similar effect.* Performance tests, used to supple- 
ment the Binet-Simon scale or other “ verbal ’’ tests, may be 
of great assistance in examination. Earl has shown that the 
relation between the “ verbal ** and “ performance scores is 
of special significance ; morons with psychopathic propensities 
tend to do better in verbal tests, while gopd results in suitable 
performance tests point to a good social adaptability. 

Feeble-minded persons contribute substantially to the 
number of criminals and prostitutes. Their fertility rate is 
higher than that of the average population, a point which has 
been largely used in the propaganda for sterilisation. It is, 
however, worth remembering that minor degrees of mental 
deficiency are fairly common in the lower social strata of the 
community, and that such persons are often useful members 
of the population not easily replaced in the performance of 
dull and simple tasks. 

Stiologjr and Pathology of Mental Defect. — There is no 
single cause of mental deficiency, and no complete classification 
on letiological groimds is as yet possible. Some types may be 
differentiated ^m an aetiological standpoint, but in a large 
proportion of cases no definite cause can be demonstrated. 
Her^tary mental defect may be distinguished from exogenous 
tj^pes ; the latter may be due to germ-cell damage, intra- 
uterine disease, birth injury, or early cerebral disease. Though 
some types have certain characteristic clinical features, the 
differential diagnosis mainly rests on the physical findings. 

^ ** Idiot fSTaots m m&aM defootires who hsTe exoqitlinud sMUtiet in a 
liiiiiftad HM ; lightning caleolatofi, memory prodigieB, etc., here been deeoribed. 



CONSTITUTIONAL ANOMALIES 1023 

The following types illustrate how far the problem of classi- 
fication and pathology of mental defect is stiU from solution. 

Microcephalic Idiots have very characteristic physical 
features. The skull is not only small in circumference, 17 in. 
or less, but it also has a characteristic shape. The forehead 
is low and receding, the occiput is flat and the chin poorly 
developed, thus making the profile rmfortunate. Clinically 
they are usually idiots, but often at the upper level near 
imbecility. They are sometimes quite versatile, can occupy 
themselves and may be trained to do simple work. They are 
generally well-behaved and pleasant to other people and 
animals. There is some evidence that microcephaly is trans- 
mitted as a recessive gene, but intra-uterine disease may play 
a part in its origin. 

Amaurotic Idiocy is rare, but well-known because of its 
peculiar clinical symptoms and characteristic post-mortem 
findings (see p. 827). 

Hydrocephalic Idiocy (see p. 777). 

Mongolism is a very common condition. About 6 per cent, 
of institutional cases of mental deficiency are mongols. 
Nothing is known about its aetiology. It is certainly not 
hereditary, but it is chiefly seen among last children of elderly 
mothers. Mongols have a characteristically flat face with 
oblique palpebral fissures which suggest the name of the 
condition. The nose is short and broad, the tongue large and 
often protruded. The skin is flabby, the muscles hypotonic, 
the joints over-flexible. There is often an umbilical hernia. 
Their low resistance against common infections accoimts for 
their early deaths. The grade of mental defect varies. Mongols 
of all grades are generally of a firiendly disposition, are easy to 
manage, and like play and music. 

Tuberose Sclerosis . — ^This is a heredo-famihal disease. It is 
characterised by three groups of symptoms : nervous symptoms 
(mental defect and epilepsy) ; cutaneous symptoms (adenoma 
sebaceum, plaques of “ peau de chagrin,” caf(£-au-lait spots) ; 
and fibromata (tumours of the retina, the heart, and the kidneys). 

Mental deficiency is not present in all cases ; where it 
exists its onset is always in the first two years of life, the first 
manifestation being developmental delay in speech, gait, and 
habits. In a large proportion mental defect is very profound ; 
in some oases superimposed psychotic (catatonic) features make 
it appear even worse than it may be. All tyi)es of epileptic 
manifestations, general convulsions, Jacksonieun fits, ai^ petit 
mod, may be observed. Adenoma sebaceum consists of a 
nodtdar rash of yellow-red or brownish colour which oovmrsj.if 



1024 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

folly developed, a butterfly-shaped area over the nose, the 
naso-labial folds (where it often begins) and part of the cheeks. 

On account of the resemblanoe of some histologioal flndings 
in the brain of tuberose sclerosis, some authors are inclin^ 
to regard von Recklinghausen’s disease as being very closely 
relat^ ; the former is the cerebral, the latter a peripheral 
manifestation of the same disease process. Mental defect is 
rarer in Recklinghausen families than in tuberose sclerosis. 

Cretinism, endemic as well as sporadic, is often combined 
with mental deficiency, the degree of which varies from mere 
dullness to the severest idiocy. The first definite symptoms, 
mainly physical, appear, as a rule, within the first two years 
of life. The mental development is retarded. The main features 
of the cretin’s psychological state are lack of initiative, slowness, 
and clumsiness. Cretins eue generally good-natured and easily 
manageable. The physical appearance is very characteristic 
(see p. 281). The results of thjrroid treatment on the mental 
state may be considerable if treatment is started early in life. 
The patients become more vivid, though the intellectual state 
does not seem to improve. 


ORGANIC SYNDROMES 

Organic syndromes are distingiiished by two main criteria : 
(1) certain characteristic mental symptoms, and (2) the 
setiological preponderance of physical factors. These mental 
symptoms are known as orgtmic mental symptoms, and it is 
most important to be familiar with them ; for without this 
knowledge it is not possible to assess the importance of physical 
findings in mental disorder, or to reach a conclusion as to 
whether they are coincidental or causal. Again, their presence 
should lead to the search for relevant physical factors that 
might otherwise have been overlooked. 

dassilleation of Organic Syndromes. — It is convenient to 
make a necessarily rough division into those cases that are 
associated with permmient pathological changes in the brain 
and those which are not. 

The former are known as organic dementias ; by dementia 
is meant a deterioration of the personality predominantly in the 
intellectaal sphere but also in the character. Impairment of 
memory and judgment, emotional lability, and deterioradion 
of the finer feelings are the predominant features. 

No 8ii^;le term has gained general acceptance to designate 
all tile membms of tiie seoond, or potentially recoverable olasa. 



ORGANIC SYNDROMES 1025 

These can be divided according to their severity into (1) organic 
neuAusthenia, and (2) delirium and allied states. 

One syndrome may be present during the whole course of 
an organic psychosis, or the various types of reaction may 
alternate. All organic reaction types may lead to dementia, 
but this may develop insidiously without passing through any 
of the other stages. Finally, delirious reactions frequently 
occur in the course of a progressive dementia. 

Organic Neurasthenia implies a state of fatigue and irritability 
often coupled with headache, hypochondriacal attitudes and 
subjective complaints of memory disturbance and difficulty in 
concentration. 

Mild cases never pass beyond such a condition ; but the 
symptoms of organic neurasthenia are frequently seen both in 
the early stages and in the convalescence of the more severe 
reactions to be described below. 

A similar picture to that of organic neurasthenia is often, 
however, seen, which does not result from the operation of 
organic causes (see Anxiety States, p. 1059). 

Delirium and Allied States 

These include (1) delirium, (2) clouded consciousness, and 
(3) Korsakow psychoses. There is a clear need for a dictator 
in psychiatric nomenclature, for some of these conditions are 
also known as “ exogenous psychoses,” infective exhaustion 
psychoses,” “ toxic confusional psychoses,” and “ symptomatic 
psychoses ” by different authors in different countries. 

iStiology. — Except in the case of the mental changes that 
follow the administration of certain rare drugs, such as mescal, 
the mental symptoms produced by various intoxications, or 
different forms of physical disorder and disease, are not in 
themselves specific. Thus typhoid fever and pneumonia can 
produce the same mental picture. 

The degree of mental disturbance, as well as its tyjK?, 
depends upon the constitution of the patient as well as upon 
the intensity and duration of the intoxication. 

Clinical Picture ol Delirium. — (a) Physical Symptoms , — 
Apart from the accompaniments of the infection or intoxication 
in question, a sluggish reaction of the pupils, nystagmus, and 
diplopia are often found. Slurred speech and paraphasia ai'e 
not imoommon, and evidence of inoo-ordination is brought 
out by attempted movements. Bladder control is often 
defective. 

(b) Mental Symptoms . — Important points are the following : 
65 



1026 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

(1) disorientation ; (2) difficulty in grasp and impairment of 
memory ; (3) increased suggestibility and responsiveness, 

together with a tendency to embroider or to “ coi^abulate ” ; 
(4) hallucinations, especially visual hallucinations ; (5) paranoid 
features ; and (6) restlessness or psychomotor activities vari- 
ously elaborate. The lucidity of consciousness changes 
quickly : a patient may be deeply somnolent when left to 
himself, but give a few quick relevant answers when roused. 

Variability in all the symptoms, which is constant unless 
the patient is so toxic as to be stuporose, is clearly bound up 
with the increased responsiveness, for these patients respond 
to all stimuli with abnormal facility and intensity. The 
increased suggestibility, with which is coupled the tendency 
to embroider or to elaborate, can often be shown when patients 
can be induced to read from blank sheetiy of paper, or when 
these patients give a circumstantial account, which is entirely 
untrue, of where they have been or what they have done. The 
same point is shown in the various misinterpretations. Every 
type of experience is liable to be misinterpreted. Thus, the 
bed-cover may be thought to be a coat ; the doctor is mistaken 
for a relative ; or a sore tongue is attributed to malicious 
burning. These misinterpretations are in part dependent upon 
expectations and fears, and they frequently, as in the last 
instance, display paranoid tendencies. They are also dependent 
upon the difficulty in grasp and clouding of consciousness which, 
in some degree, is invariable. This constantly changes, but at 
all times attention is poorly sustained, concentration is difficult, 
and thought is laboured and often disconnected. These patients 
readily tire, are distracted by outside happenings, or sink back 
into the confusion from which they have been partially aroused. 
The memory for recent events is particularly poor, and in the 
more severe cases gross disorientation is shown. 

Visual hallucinations are extremely common and are highly 
characteristic (see p. 999). They can be terrifying and are most 
frequent in acute intoxications. Auditory hallucinations are less 
frequent, but may persist for a time after visual hallucinations 
and evidence of gross confusion have disappeared. A smaller 
number of patients complain of olfactory and tactile hallucina- 
tions. The hallucinations have frequently an illusional basis. 

All the points that have been mentioned are clearly seen 
in the paranoid attitudes and delusional ideas, which are 
typically transient and ill-systematised, and which are, in part 
at least, dependent upon the difficulty in grasp ; for if ^fficulty 
is experienced in a clear grasp of what is talung place, it is 
comprehensible that doubt and suspicion should arise. Further, 



ORGANIC SYNDROMES 


1027 


they are in part dependent upon the increased suggestibility. 
Misinterpretations are often the starting-point for delusional 
formations. 

All delirious patients at some time and to some extent feel 
themselves the subjects of persecution or annoyance, which 
may range from vague ideas of reference to more crystallised 
beliefs evidenced by talk of plots, gangs, wars, and revolutions. 
Others beUeve they are to be poisoned or killed or tortured, or 
that they are in danger and about to be robbed or kidnapped. 

The degree of restlessness varies, and ranges from tremor 
to the most highly co-ordinated and purposive movements. 
Many toss and turn, grope, kick, and rub. ‘‘ Investigating ” 
and occupational activities are highly characteristic. These 
patients will search vaguely or indulge in activities familiar 
to them, such as driving their cars or telling their rosaries. 
Finally, as might be expected, the mood is commonly a dreamy, 
dazed drifting state, very labile, and with rapid changes. 
Perplexity, irritability, mistrust, and definite suspicion are 
frequently seen. Anxiety may change into frank fear, and in 
many fear is the dominant affect throughout. Talk of suicide, 
or even definite suicidal attempts are by no means uncommon. 
On the other hand, euphoric states and phases may be seen. 

Delirium Tremens is the term commonly applied to acute 
delirious reactions of alcoholic origin . They usually last between 
three and six days, and end suddenly, often with a long sleep. 
Though it is quite true that alcohol is the most common cause of 
acute delirious reactions with confusion, restlessness, fear and 
vivid visual hallucinations as prominent features, yet the same 
picture may result from other intoxications. It is not therefore 
necessary to describe the symptoms of delirium tremens 
separately. The physical symptoms, namely, tremor, ataxia, 
tenderness of the nerve trunks, may lead to the correct 
diagnosis. 

The dominant features of the delirious reaction can be 
summarised by the statement that it is a variable, restless, 
suggestible, confused and clouded state with a striking fre- 
quency of visual hallucinations and paranoid tendencies and 
ideas accompanied by a labile mood predominantly irritable, 
anxious, fearful, and depressed. Such a general statement 
leaves out the individual personal setting and colouring which 
plays a large part in shaping the delirious reaction that is 
shown. This connection is more obvious if the disturbances 
are of relatively light intensity, for if the depth of the 
disturbance is too groat, individual differences tend to become 
blurred. In the less severe disturbances manic or depressive 



1028 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

features, or whatever it may be, may greatly colour and even 
appear to dominate the picture. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis of a delirious state will of course 
necessarily depend mainly upon the physical disorder or disease 
responsible for the condition. Physical prostration consequent 
upon restlessness and excitement may, however, materiaUy 
alter this course, and may induce a fatal issue which otherwise 
would not have taken place. Broadly speaking, the unstable 
and psychopathic, the young and the mentally defective are 
particularly liable to develop delirious reactions of a wild and 
impulsive type. 

In the vast majority of cases the prognosis as regards the 
mental state is excellent, and recovery is rapid and complete. 
There are, however, certain important exceptions. It is not 
uncommon to see delirious reactions resulting from alcohol or 
bromide superimjKDsed upon other psychoses, and after the 
delirium has cleared up the underlying psychosis will then 
become evident and rapid recovery will not take place. A 
careful history should avoid this difficulty. 

Again, delirious reactions may usher in a psychosis of an 
ominous variety which was not apparent prior to its onset. 
Certain schizophrenic and paranoid psychoses may start in 
this way. 

It is always wise to be more guarded about the prognosis 
if the personality of the individual sufferer is such as to give 
grounds in general for psychiatric concern, especially when 
schizophrenic features are to be observed during the course of 
the illness itself. 

Finally, a delirium occurring in those with organic brain 
disease may clear up, leaving an organic dementia of greater or 
less degree. Korsakow syndrome is a frequent sequel of alcoholic 
delirium. 

Treatment. — Attention to the underlying physical cause of 
the condition is of course the first consideration, but a great 
deal can be done in other ways. 

It must be remembered that these patients are unable to 
differentiate or discriminate, or to grasp situations that are 
new, complex, and unfamiliar. Thus, particularly in the case 
of elderly patients, removal to the strange atmosphere of a 
hospital ward may precipitate mental symptoms. 

(Conversely, quiet, simple, and familiar surroundings tend 
to prevent or ameliorate delirium, and it is most important to 
try to reduce the chances of misinterpretation to a minimum. 
(Jonstant reassurance and explanation must bo given, preferably 
by the same doctor or nurse, for these patients can soothed 



ORGANIC SYNDROMES 1029 

and quietened nearly as readily as they can be upset and 
perplexed. 

Simple Clowding of Consciousness. — ^In many cases a fully 
developed delirious reaction never occurs. During the day such 
patients may complain merely of feeling weak and tired, with 
difficulty in concentration, and examination may only disclose 
some mental dulling or slowness. During the night, however, 
and in the more severe cases during the day as well, definite 
confusion with transient disorientation and difficulty in 
grasp may become more obvious. With this are frequently 
coupled visual hallucinations, at first hypnogogic, or of the 
“ elementary ’’ or simple type that has been described (see 
p. 999). In addition, there may at times be evidence in various 
forms of the labile mood change described in classical delirium, 
as well as fleeting paranoid tendencies or ideas of reference. 
Restlessness and broken sleep may also be observed. 

Bromide Intoxication. — These states of simple confusion 
are not uncommon in the less severe degrees of bromide 
intoxication : and when this is so, the diagnosis is frequently 
missed because of the predominance of the depressive or anxiety 
symptoms for which bromide has been ordered. 

An apparent change for the worse in any functional ’’ 
syndrome taking the form of increased suspiciousness, nocturnal 
restlessness, and especially increased difficulty in grasp, should 
always raise the possibility of bromide intoxication ; and 
when tests for intellectual capacity (memory, calculations, 
etc.) reveal defects, these suspicions should be strengthened. 
The examination of the blood bromide will then clinch the 
matter. 

Korsakow or Amnesic Syndromes. — In this variety of organic 
reactions which, it is important to stress, although most 
frequently to be observed in, is not confined to alcoholism, the 
memory disturbance is the most striking feature, and not the 
difficulty in grasp or clouding of consciousness. On the contrary, 
these patients may at first sight appear to be normally quick 
in the uptake ; and they often speak with great fluency and 
apparent plausibility. But examination reveals gross memory 
defects. These defects are most obvious in the appreciation of 
time relationships, especially for recent events. In order to 
compensate, as it were, for these memory defects, these patients 
confabvlatey and often show the most striking suggestibility, so 
that they tell the most extraordinary and inaccurate tales, 
amplifying them with full and quite fictitious details on little 
pressure. A lack of initiative and a fatuous or indolent mood 
are commonly seen. Polyneuritis, originally described as an 



1028 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


features, or whatever it may be, may greatly colour and even 
appear to dominate the picture. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis of a delirious state will of course 
necessarily depend mainly upon the physical disorder or disease 
responsible for the condition. Physical prostration consequent 
upon restlessness and excitement may, however, materially 
alter this course, and may induce a fatal issue which otherwise 
would not have taken place. Broadly speaking, the unstable 
and psychopathic, the yoimg and the mentally defective are 
particularly liable to develop delirious reactions of a wild and 
impulsive type. 

In the vast majority of cases the prognosis as regards the 
mental state is excellent, and recovery is rapid and complete. 
There are, however, certain important exceptions. It is not 
imcommon to see delirious reactions resulting from alcohol or 
bromide superimposed upon other psychoses, and after the 
delirium has cleared up the underlying psychosis will then 
become evident and rapid recovery will not take place. A 
careful history should avoid this difficulty. 

Again, delirious reactions may usher in a psychosis of an 
ominous variety which was not apparent prior to its onset. 
Certain schizophrenic and paranoid psychoses may start in 
this way. 

It is always wise to l>e more guarded about the prognosis 
if the personality of the individual sufferer is such as to give 
groimds in general for psychiatric concern, especially when 
schizophrenic features are to be observed during the course of 
the illness itself. 

Finally, a delirium occurring in those with organic brain 
disease may clear up, leaving an organic dementia of greater or 
less degree . Korsakow syndrome is a frequent sequel of alcoholic 
delirium. 

Treatment. — Attention to the underlying physical cause of 
the condition is of course the first consideration, but a great 
deal can be done in other ways. 

It must be remembered that these patients are unable to 
differentiate or discriminate, or to grasp situations that are 
new, complex, and unfamiliar. Thus, particularly in the case 
of elderly patients, removal to the strange atmosphere of a 
hospital ward may precipitate mental symptoms. 

Conversely, quiet, simple, and familiar surroundings tend 
to prevent or ameliorate delirium, and it is most important to 
try U) reduce the chances of misinterpretation to a minimum. 
Constant reassurance and explanation must be given, preferably 
by the same doctor or nurse, for these patients can soothed 



ORGANIC SYNDROMES 1029 

and quietened nearly as readily as they can be upset and 
perplexed. 

Simple Clovding of Con8cious7iess, — In many cases a fully 
developed delirious reaction never occurs. During the day such 
patients may complain merely of feeling weak and tired, with 
difficulty in concentration, and examination may only disclose 
some mental dulling or slowness. During the night, however, 
and in the more severe cases during the day as well, definite 
confusion with transient disorientation and difficulty in 
grasp may become more obvious. With this are frequently 
coupled visual hallucinations, at first hypnogogic, or of the 
“ elementary or simple type that has been described (see 
p. 999). In addition, there may at times be evidence in various 
forms of the labile mood change described in classical delirium, 
as well as fleeting paranoid tendencies or ideas of reference. 
Restlessness and broken sleep may also be observed. 

Bromide Intoxication. — ^These states of simple confusion 
are not uncommon in the less severe degrees of bromide 
intoxication : and when this is so, the diagnosis is frequently 
missed because of the predominance of the depressive or anxiety 
symptoms for which bromide has been ordered. 

An apparent change for the worse in any '' functional 
syndrome taking the form of increased suspiciousness, nocturnal 
restlessness, and especially increased difficulty in grasp, should 
always raise the possibility of bromide intoxication ; and 
when tests for intellectual capacity (memory, calculations, 
etc.) reveal defects, these suspicions should be strengthened. 
The examination of the blood bromide will then clinch the 
matter. 

Korsakow or Amnesic Syndromes, — In this variety of organic 
reactions which, it is important to stress, although most 
frequently to be observed in, is not confined to alcoholism, the 
memory disturbance is the most striking feature, and not the 
difficulty in grasp or clouding of consciousness. On the contrary, 
these patients may at first sight appear to be normally quick 
in the uptake ; and they often speak with great fluency and 
apparent plausibility. But examination reveals gross memory 
defects. These defects are most obvious in the appreciation of 
time relationships, especially for recent events. In order to 
compensate, as it were, for these memory defects, these patients 
confabvJate, and often show the most striking suggestibility, so 
that they tell the most extraordinary and inaccurate tales, 
amplifying them with full and quite fictitious details on little 
pressure. A lack of initiative and a fatuous or indolent mood 
are commonly seen. Polyneuritis, originally described as an 



1030 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

essential feature (polyneuritic psychosis), may or may not be 
present. 

A large proportion of the cases of amnesic syndromes 
develop out of a delirious state. 

The prognosis of a fully developed Korsakow S 5 mdrome is 
poor, and the usual outcome is a silly, cheerful, but irritable 
condition with some disturbance of initiative and grasp. 


THE ORGANIC DEMENTIAS 

All organic dementias have many features in common, and 
the main characteristics have already been given. They 
resemble the potentially recoverable organic syndromes in that 
the clinical pictures also seem to be mainly referable to the 
intensity of action and duration of operation of the morbid 
process, and to be at least relatively independent of the exact 
nature of this process. 

The possible variations in the clinical picture and course 
will best be appreciated by considering them under some of 
the more common causes responsible for their production. It 
must be appreciated that the various morbid processes to be 
described, though they tend to produce permanent pathological 
changes in the brain, do not always do so, with the result that 
the degree and type of dementia, and the possibilities of partial 
or complete recovery or remission vary. 

General Paralysis of the Insane 

In this section only the mental symptoms are dealt with. 
Other features of the disease, including the results of malarial 
treatment, are dealt with elsewhere (vide p. 865 and p. 878). 
The cardinal symptom is a progressive deterioration of 
the personality, both in intelligence and in character ; 
depression, excitement, stupor, and disturbances of con- 
sciousness can be regarded as accessory symptoms which 
may or may not be present. The onset is usually gradual ; 
and even when the disease appears to start suddenly or 
dramatically, with a state of confusion or fit, a careful 
history will generally reveal the presence of symptoms of 
an organic neurasthenia previously : these include headache, 
fatiguability, slight complaints or evidence of memory failure, 
and reduced resistance to alcohol. Some change in l^haviour 
may have been observed by relations or friends who knew the 
patient intimately. Thus it is common to hear that patients 



THE ORGANIC DEMENTIAS 1031 

have been more irritable, more egotistic and less considerate 
than formerly ; that they ate, talked, and drank more than 
was their previous wont, and showed less sexual restraint. 
Objective evidence of memory impairment, esi)ecially for 
recent events, names, and dates, may have been evident, and 
the patients may have become more careless and their writing 
less tidy and correct. In spite of these early symptoms, the 
patients may be able to deal with their work well enough, 
especially if it is of a simple or routine nature. But they 
often fail when called upon to show any special initiative 
or judgment, or when faced with any exceptional or 
difficult task. This may lead to the belief that the stress 
imposed by the particular situation has led to the break- 
down, which is thought to be of a so-called functional type ; 
and hence diagnostic mistakes may be made tmless a care- 
ful history is taken and a thorough examination carried out 
for organic signs. 

With the progress of the illness the patient becomes more 
indolent and apathetic. Depression, when it occurs, is super- 
ficial. Hypochondriacal and melancholic ideas are often silly 
and inconsistent. Disturbances of memory are prominent 
features, and even when immediate retention (see p. 996) is 
not so bad, recollection and reproduction of recent material is 
often grossly at fault. This is apparently due to the combined 
effects of disturbances of attention, of the capacity to synthesise, 
and of remembering in the more strict sense ; and other factors 
that contribute are the disturbances of judgment that interfere 
with the patient’s capacity to criticise and correct his own 
wrong answers, especially when this is combined with a lack 
of interest. 

The final stage of the illness is characterised by a profound 
and generalised dementia. The defects of memory grow, until 
even old and familiar material, such as the dates of birthday, 
and of marriage, and even the names of children, disappear. 
The patient fabricates spontaneously, or can be induced to do 
80 . The disturbance of memory and judgment finally becomes 
most profound. One patient threw his cigar butt out of an 
upper window, and wanted to follow it through the window 
to have another puff ; and another patient, with optic atrophy, 
constantly forgot his blindness and asked for the lights to ^ 
turned on. 

The most contradictory statements can be made and 
accepted. The mood varies between apathy and euphoria, and 
the characteristic emotional lability is generally evident. Hand 
in hand with the mental deterioration goes a progressive 



1032 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

physical deterioration leading finally to an extreme degree of 
wasting and paralysis. 

The course of the disease and the clinical picture may differ 
considerably from that which has been described. There is an 
acute type, rapidly progressive, often with numerous fits and a 
very bad prognosis. The expansive or classical form, which is 
nowadays rare, is characterised by a demented euphoria and 
ideas or delusions of grandeur. (“ He, he, he,’' said one patient 
when asked to multiply five by two, “ you can’t catch me ; 
ten million.”) 

Depressive symptoms in the depressive form may disguise 
the dementia, although the melancholic or hypochondriacal 
ideas usually lack coherence and system. Catatonic and 
paranoid pictures may occur in the course of the illness, the 
latter with relative frequency during or immediately after 
malarial treatment. 

Juvenile paralysis develops as the result of congenital 
instead of acquired sj^hpilis. There is a progressive intellectual 
deterioration, with the usual neurological accompaniments. 
Tlie picture is even less dramatic than the simple demented 
form of the adult type, and the prognosis is bad. 

Mental Symptoms with Vasculak Disease. 

The mental symptoms that occur with hypertension, what- 
ever its pathology may be, can be distinguished from those 
that result from arteriosclerosis, though possible transitions 
and variations must be borne in mind. 

The presence of either hypertension' or arteriosclerosis 
often facilitates the production of other types of reaction of 
so-called functional type ; thus the presence of the symptoms 
of anxiety or depression may, and not infrequently do, so 
dominate the picture that organic factors and organic mental 
symptoms may be overlooked. Similarly hysterical reactions 
are rften “ released.” 

The preliminary stage of either type of cerebral vascular 
disease shows the non-specific but characteristic picture of 
organic neurasthenia : increased irritability and fatiguability, 
hei^ache, insomnia, subjective disturbances of memory, and 
frequently giddiness. The irritability is often associated with a 
tendency to become easily flustered ” (organic lability of 
mood). 

Hyperteniiom— Short attacks of interruption of conscious- 
ness, very similar to petit mal, may occur. What might be 
regarded as an extension of the same phenomenon, namely, 



THE ORGANIC DEMENTIAS 


1033 


confusional states of variable duration and with varying 
features, may also call for psychiatric treatment. Such attacl^ 
may follow an apoplectic seizure t but in other cases no 
neurological signs can be discovered on which the assumption 
of structural damage to the brain can be based. During these 
confusional psychoses, the blood pressure may be either higher 
or more fluctuating than it was before. 

The clinical picture may be that of delirium, and, especially 
when the patient is an alcoholic subject, an acute delirium. 
In other cases, depressive or, more rarely, manic pictures with 
confusional features dominate the picture ; and finally ecstatic 
states can be observed. 

Prognosis , — ^The normal duration of these attacks is a few 
weeks to a few months, but in some cases the psychosis only 
lasts a few days. 

The confusions that so frequently occur at night in 
arteriosclerotic and senile patients may well be of the 
same nature. 

The prognosis for these states in themselves is good ; but 
there is always the danger that the emotional disturbance, and 
concomitant rise in blood pressure, may precipitate a cerebral 
haemorrhage. 

Recovery, when it takes place, is usually complete, but 
repeated attacks usually leave behind residual symptoms, often 
at first very slight. In the long run, essential hypertension, 
with or without acute episodes, and with or without apoplectic 
strokes and subsequent focal symptoms, is liable to bring about 
an alteration of personality. These patients become irritable, 
difficult to get on with, forgetful, narrow in their outlook, 
labile in their emotions, and less dependable in every respect. 
Their intelligence is, however, very slightly impaired, and they 
usually retain very good insight. This, coupled with their 
emotional lability, tends to increased self-observation and worry 
about their condition, with secondary bad results on the blood 
pressure. 

Treatment . — This vicious circle should be the object of 
psychiatric treatment ; and even the hypertension itself may 
respond weU to suitable psychological management and 
psychotherapy. 

Arteriosclerosis. — In arteriosclerotics the neurasthenic 
syndrome of the prodromal stage blends into that of a slowly 
progressive dementia. Arteriosclerotic deterioration differs 
from the intellectual deterioration produced by other causes, 
especially general paralysis of the insane, in that arteriosclerotic 
deterioration is more patchy and less generalised. The fa9ade 



1034 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


of the patient’s personality is preserved longer and more 
completely. For a considerable time what might be called 
the peripheral functions of intelligence are impaired rather 
than the “ central ” functions of judgment, reasoning, and 
insight. 

Thus the patient may show marked impairment when 
examined by the usual tests for memory, but be able to keep 
his end up, and to conceal his defect from the outer world 
with the aid of a note-book or diary and a strict routine, 
though he may have to struggle very hard. 

The disturbance of the finer feelings that is so conspicuous 
in early general paralysis of the insane is absent in the early 
stage of arteriosclerosis, but as the illness progresses it becomes 
more apparent. The patients develop, together with an 
increased emotional lability, a gradual deterioration of their 
higher feelings and social instincts. They become increasingly 
egotistic, and feel less warmly about their friends and relations, 
^xual activity may reappear as the result of impaired inhibition ; 
and, owing to the lack of opportunity or capacity for normal 
satisfaction, the patient may finally fall back on infantile 
forms of gratification, such as exposure and obscene practices 
with children. These patients are often referred to the 
psychiatrist by the courts. 

Insomnia is a characteristic symptom of the early stages, 
and may finally lead to, or be combined with, the motor 
restlessness and slight confusion that develops as the disease 
advances. The patients become exhausted by their nocturnal 
restlessness and sleep half the day. They may damage them- 
selves during these periods of restless confusion at night either 
by falling when they try to get out of bed, or by stumbling in 
their disorientated state in the darkened room. 

The picture is often complicated by focal symptoms due to 
cerebral thrombosis. 

The Differential Diagnosis from early general paralysis of 
the insane and cerebro -vascular syphilis is the main problem. 
Though the types of dementia show some characteristic differ- 
ences already described, serological examinations of the blood 
and cerebrospinal fluid must be performed. A slow-growing 
cerebral tumour may produce a similar mental picture. 

Prognosis , — The ultimate prognosis in cerebral arterio- 
sclerosis is bad, but it is diffie^t to predict the rate of 
deterioration. 

Treaimeni , — The treatment is that of arteriosclerosis in 
general (see p. 681). The psychiatric therapy is purely 
symptomatic. 



THE ORGANIC DEMENTIAS 


1035 


Senile Dementia 

Senile dementia may be looked upon as an exaggeration 
of the usual psychological changes of old age. It is a pro- 
gressive deterioration in which disturbances of memory are 
conspicuous. It is normal for people in their old age to become 
more narrow in their outlook and rigid in their views. Senile 
patients show these points in exaggerated form or even in 
caricature. In addition, they have difficulty in grasp. The 
combination of these factors leads to increased distrust and 
suspicion, and provides the basis for the numerous paranoid 
features of the senile. The disturbances of memory and of 
judgment prevent these ideas from being developed into a 
real delusional system ; but ideas of reference and of persecution 
are very common. The senile patient often complains that 
everything is stolen from him ; and such ideas are favoured 
by greediness and forgetfulness. 

The patients become increasingly egotistic and their 
emotional life becomes shallow ; the deaths of near relatives 
make little impression. In contrast to the emotional poverty, 
emotional expression may be increased (organic lability). 
Decrease of potency and loss of control account for sexual 
offences, such as lewd practices with little girls. A person 
committing such an offence for the first time in old age should 
always be examined by a psychiatrist. Senile dementia is 
often not recognised in its earliest stages by the layman. 

The interest and initiative shown by the senile decrease 
often rapidly ; but sometimes they develop an empty restless- 
ness, especially in the evening and at night. They then totter 
about aimlessly, more or less confused, start to get up, to 
pack, or try to leave the room or house. 

Presbyophrenia , — This is generally described as a particular 
type of senile dementia, and is characterised by a very gross 
memory impairment for recent events, coupled with an 
unusually well-preserved personality. These patients are 
generally pyknic in build and possessors of a hypomanic 
temperament. 

The physical symptoms are those of old age. Tremor, an im- 
passive expression, and an increase in muscle tone are often 
seen. Gross focal symptoms are evidence of 8uperimi)osed 
vascular disease and do not belong to the typical picture. 

The Morbid Anatomy of senile dementia shows histological 
changes apart from the general signs of senile involution of the 
brain that are not, however, entirely specific. They need not 
be gone into here. 



1036 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


The Prognosis for senile dementia is, naturally, very bad as 
regards recovery ; the prognosis as regards life depends upon the 
physical state of the patient. Much restlessness and confusion 
tend to shorten the course owing to physical complications. 

Presenile Dementias. — Whereas the usual age for hyper- 
tensive disease is between forty-five and fifty-five, for arterio- 
sclerosis between fifty-five and seventy, senile dementia rarely 
begins before the seventieth year of life. But there is a group 
of cases where a slowly progressive dementia, similar to senile 
dementia, is observed earlier in life, beginning in the fifties. 
Amongst others, the following types have been described : — 

1. Alzheimer's Disease . — There are certain features that 
make the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease possible, even apart 
from the age of onset. The dementia is very profound, but the 
behaviour of the patient and the emotional responses are 
surprisingly well preserved. Symptoms of aphasia, agnosia, 
etc., are also frequent, but less well defined than when they 
result from focal lesions of vascular origin. Stereotyped 
movements and speech are very common, the latter finally 
deteriorating into repetitive utterances that are meaningless. 

2. Pick's Disease is somewhat similar in its clinical picture, 
but differs in pathology. Circumscribed areas of atrophy can 
be found in the frontal or temporal lobes, or both. This disease 
is sometimes familial. 

The clinical picture in the early stage often resembles that 
of general paralysis of the insane. Death occurs after six to 
twelve years. 

3. Huntington's Chorea is often given as a third type of 
presenile dementia (see p. 826). The dementia has no particular 
features ; changes in character sometimes precede impairment 
of memory and judgment, and both may be evident before the 
chorea develops. 

Mental Symptoms in Encephaij[ti8 Lethabgica 

The mental symptoms during the acute phase show nothing 
exceptional or particularly characteristic. After recovery from 
this phase the patients are often inert, restless, and slow, and 
the ^velopment of Parkinsonism is generally preceded by a 
neurasthenic picture, the patients being describe as irritable, 
moody, and hypochondriacal. The Parkinsonian state is 
gener^y accompanied by a slowing down of all psychic 
processes and is not associated with a true dementia. But this 
general slowing is combined with loss of initiative which may 
give rise to a picture that resembles a dementia, and whidi 



THE ORGANIC DEMENTIAS 1037 

certainly results in the reduction of the level of the previous 
personality ; yet tests demonstrate that all the fundamental 
mental faculties are well preserved. Sometimes schizophrenic 
or paranoid pictures develop, and the obsessional and com- 
pulsive phenomena that occur during the oculogyric crises 
are of great theoretical interest. The patients report that 
during these crises they feel impelled to say or to do some- 
thing. They may also show obsessional symptoms between the 
attacks. 

Encephalitis lethargica occurring in childhood may result 
in a peculiar picture, and produce a very gross change in 
personality. After the acute phase, children may become 
increasingly restless, irritable, and aggressive, and appear to 
lose all moral sense. They beg, steal, lie, and are cruel to other 
children and to animals. They talk incessantly, cling to those 
they meet and cannot be detached, and become unmanageable 
at school and at home. Abnormal sexual curiosity and sexual 
problems are also often observed. Even in milder cases lack 
of concentration interferes with any successful work at school 
or subsequently. 

Post-encephalitic adolescents sometimes show certain features 
of the above syndrome, especially a lack of sexual restraint. 

The prognosis of j^st-encephalitic conditions in children 
was originally regarded as very bad, but follow-up studies 
show that about one-third become socially adaptable in spite 
of organic brain disease, another third develop Parkinsonism. 


, Mental Symptoms in Epilepsy 

Epileptics are often subject to periodic changes of mood, 
characterised by surliness and irritability. Such periods may 
or may not precede epileptic attacks. 

Epileptic psychoses usually follow an epileptic attack, but 
they may also occur independently. In the first instance, the 
patients do not recover consciousness as usual, but remain in 
a clouded state, disorientated, confused, slow in grasp, and 
tending to perse verate. They often appear tense and perplexed, 
and are sometimes restless. They may wander about and are 
often arrested by the police because they are behaving in a 
strange manner. It is this type of patient who may be seen 
suddenly undressing in the street or exposing himself. In other 
cases this picture of simple dimming of consciousness is 
complicated by hallucinations and motor excitement, giving 
rise to the picture of an epileptic twilight state. The hallucina- 
tions are unusually vivid and great fear is a very prominent 



1038 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


feature. Sometimes a religious ecstatic mood and a corrc' 
spending content prevail. 

Epileptics in twilight states are the most dangerous patients. 
They defend themselves against their supposed attackers, or 
attack those about them. They refuse any sort of treatment, 
struggle wildly, and may attempt suicide. Patients with 
recurring twilight states always seem to act in a very similar 
way. These twilight states seldom last longer than a fortnight, 
and no means of cutting them short is known. Close supervision 
is necessary, and treatment by some form of continuous narcosis 
is often adopted. Some patients respond to luminal by the 
development of these twilight states and this should be borne 
in mind when deciding on treatment. 

At least two-thirds of all epileptics show progressive 
deterioration of variable degree, and there is some corre- 
lation between this deterioration and the number of fits. 
The psychological picture of epileptic deterioration can be 
regarded as an attenuated form of the post-paroxysmal con- 
fiisional reaction. Patients become slow, have fewer ideas and 
associations, and tend to express themselves in an increasingly 
circumstantial manner. Their mental horizon narrows, and 
they lose interest in all except themselves and their illness. 
“ My fits ” become their favourite topic, and there is often an 
interesting contrast between this increased concern and their 
optimistic attitude towards their disease. They tend to believe 
that their fits have now ceased or their number is decreasing 
or their severity is less. This makes it difficult to judge 
the result of treatment without observ^ation in hospital. 
Epileptics are often outwardly submissive and polite in their 
peculiar circumstantial way. Many of them turn to religion 
and become over-devout and bigoted ; but it is the devoutness 
of religiosity, and fundamentally they are sensitive, irritable, 
suspicious, and egotistic. If there are several epileptics in the 
same ward they usually quarrel. The epileptic disturbance of 
memory is mainly, especially in the early stages, a difficulty 
of recollection, another expression of their poverty of asso- 
ciation. It is therefore noticeable both for remote and for 
recent material. 

Mental Symptoms following Head Injury 

Concussion is a state of unconsciousness or disturbed con- 
sciousness produced by a sudden mechanical injury to the brain. 
It is more frequently seen in closed than in open injuries, and 
does not necessarily occur in penetratiijg injuries such as gun- 



THE ORGANIC DEMENTIAS 


1039 


shot wounds. The disturbance of consciousness may vary 
from simple dimming of short duration to complete unconscious- 
ness lasting for hours or days. During recovery from the latter 
the patient passes through the stages of dimming of conscious- 
ness as described on page 990. Subsequent amnesia and 
retrograde amnesia are discussed on page 997. Neurasthenic 
symptoms, especially headaches (of an organic character), 
may exist for a considerable length of time after a concussion. 

In severe concussion and cerebral contusion, recovery from 
unconsciousness is protracted and various complications may 
arise. The patients may remain slow in grasp, with little 
initiative and with more or less severe disturbances of 
remembering with or without the tendency for confabulate ; 
or they may become restless, excitable, and actively delirious. 
They are often extremely cheerful, and have surprisingly little 
insight into their condition, even after the acute phase of 
delirium has passed. The recovery is gradual ; a state of 
depersonalisation may be observed in the transitional stage. 

A confusional state may sometimes be observed as the 
result of cerebral compression, occurring instead of imconscious- 
ness, but possessing the same diagnostic significance. 

The prognosis for post-traumatic psychoses depends on the 
type, degree, and extent of the brain injury and on the general 
physical condition of the patient. Arteriosclerotic and alcoholic 
patients are less likely to recover as quickly and as completely 
as do young and vigorous patients. Severe post- traumatic 
psychoses not uncommonly last as long as three months, and in 
a proportion of cases the recovery from delirium or an amnesic 
syndrome is followed by a neurasthenic condition. 

Focal symptoms sometimes point to localised damage to 
the brain, and poverty of motor activity with euphoria and 
lack of insight may be signs of local injury to the frontal lobe. 
The lack of insight is often not recognised as a morbid symptom 
at all. 

When symptoms persist after damage to the brain they 
have the general characteristics of dementia, in which some- 
times intellectual impairment and sometimes a change of 
character predominate. Traumatic epilepsy may in severe 
cases lead to a progressive epileptic dementia. 

In a small number of cases psychoses of manic-depressive 
or, more frequently, of schizophrenic type follow head injuries ; 
the more closely they are related to the accident, the better 
the prognosis. 

Differentud Diagnosis . — After head injuries, as after other 
accidents, mental symptoms may develop that are not due to 



1040 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


the injiiry to the brain, but to the emotional shock and to the 
subsequent distress consequent upon the physical injury, or 
altered circumstances arising indirectly from the accident. 
The so-called shock neuroses are rare after serious head injuries, 
probably owing to the subsequent amnesia for the accident 
itself. Far more common are hysterical reactions (see p. 1062). 
But when examining a post-concussional case with neurotic 
symptoms it should be borne in mind that the type of response 
shown by a patient can be altered by damage to his brain ; 
all patients, and especially those who give no history of 
previous hysterical symptoms or hysterical predisposition, 
should therefore be examined most carefully for organic 
mental symptoms ; organic lability of affect and disturbances 
of concentration and memory will often be disclosed by a 
thorough examination, or from a careful history obtained 
from an independent source. Standardised psychological tests 
of deterioration (Babcock, Shipley) are a valuable help in the 
diagnosis. But they require careful interpretation in the light 
of all other data. Many changes in behaviour following a head 
injury are not necessarily due to structural damage to the brain 
and consequent change in the imtient’s personality, but are 
caused by psychological factors often only loosely connected 
with the event that caused the accident. 


SCHIZOPHRENIA 
{Dementia Prcecox) 

The term schizophrenia (“ split mind ''), first proj>osed by 
Bleuler to describe what he held to be the cardinal feature, is 
now substituted for the older term dementia praecox, which 
gives an unfortunate and misleading impression ; for there is 
complete agreement that the onset in these psychoses need not 
necessarily be early (praecox) nor result in a dementia. 

It is now believed that “ paranoid states ” or “ systematised 
delusional insanities,” which are sometimes described separately, 
should really be regarded as belonging to the schizophrenic 
group, which is hence sometimes describe as the ” schizophrenic 
paranoid series.” 

The discussion on the definition and delimitation of the 
schizophrenias is not yet closed. Difficulties arise because 
some writers use the term schizophrenia as the name of a 
disease (characterised by certain cardinal symptoms, its course 
and a hypothetical pathological ” process ”). Here it is 
applied to a clinical syndrome independent of cause, course, 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 1041 

arid possible pathology. Confusion may be avoided if a 
distinction is made between schizophrenic symptoms and a 
series of schizophrenic illnesses. 

Clinical Picture. — ^The clinical symptoms in the different 
types of schizophrenia are so numerous and varied that it is 
proposed to describe them first, and to deal later with their 
relative diagnostic values and their grouping in different 
syndromes and types. 

Emotional Disturbances , — Irritability and oversensitiveness 
may be early symptoms, but shallowness or poverty of emotional 
response, together with a general apathy and loss of interest 
in the outside world, are more characteristic. Loss of emotional 
rapport may often be felt by the observer or by the friends 
and relations before it becomes clearly manifest in the patient’s 
behaviour. Yet the patient may feel it himself and complain 
of it, or he may experience it as a change in the outside world. 
In more advanced cases the loss of emotional response is often 
disguised behind a silly cheerful indifference. Schizophrenic 
incongruity and inadequacy of affect (see p. 995) are often 
clearly seen in these more advanced cases, and this may make 
the patient’s emotional response appear incomprehensible to 
others. Finally, the indifference and emotional impoverish- 
ment play an important part in leading to dirtiness, self-neglect, 
self-exposure, and shameless masturbation. 

Disturbances of emotional expression are closely related to, 
and are often difficult to distinguish from, inadequate and 
incongruous emotions. Giggling for no apparent reason, or for 
an apparently inadequate reason, is often an early anomaly ; 
and in later stages, quite apart from its appropriateness, the 
expression of emotion may be unusual in itself, stiff, or slow 
and bizarre, so that the patient’s behaviour resembles bad 
acting. 

'The emotional deterioration leads to a progressive with- 
drawal of these patients from contact with the outer world, 
so that they become more and more solitary, self-absorbed, 
and frequently hypochondriacal, until finally they appear to 
live entirely in a world of their own. 

DisturOmces of Volition are often combined with the 
emotional disturbances. The patient may himself complain 
of lack of energy before the friends jmd relatives notice the 
poverty of initiative, and the lack of decision and determination. 
In the later stages, these may become so profound as to leave 
the patient an immobile figure sitting or standing about in 
the wards of a mental hospital. But when the disturbance is 
less severe, patients of this type are frequently found either 
66 



1042 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEPICINE 

aittang about at home, or Miaongst the Tagabonds who drift 
about the world without aim or purpose. 

The severest form of this dkturbanoe oonstitutee stupw, 
which may be oombined with abnormal suggestibility shown 
in its extreme d^p«e in the so-called automatio obedknoe 
(see p. 992). 

Ambivalence is the term used for anotiier diaraoteriatio 
schizophrenic feature : contradictory impulses are paresuit 
simultaneously, or arise in rapid successfon. This is of^ well 
seen when such patients are asked to shake hands. Thus the 
patient may begin to hold out his hand and then withdraw it ; 
the examiner then withdraws his hand ; whereupon tiie patient 
holds his hand out again, only to withdraw it once more when 
the examiner makes a response. When a request or suggestion 
is immediately followed by counter-impulses the distiirbanoe 
is called negativism. 

Disturbances of Motor Activity . — The same incongruity may 
be observed in the various types of schizophrenic activity. 
A state of apathy may be interrupted by the performance of 
some sudden impulsive action, so that these patients may 
suddenly start shouting for no apparent reason, become 
destructive, or attack others. These sudden outbursts of 
activity are sometimes carried out in obedience to haUudnatory 
voices, but in other instances pati^ts who me able and willing 
to provide information are often unaUe to give any reason for 
them. 

States of more prolonged excitement are sAaa common ; 
the patients may indulge in strange attitudes, or show peculiar 
movements, apparently expressive of such states as terror 
or ecstasy, or they perform wild and purposefoss, i^pparently 
incompteluBnsible, movements. The movements themaebres are 
often not performed with the normal degree of precision and 
co-ordination. Stereotyped repetitions are often seen, such 
as rooking, knocking, and mbbii^. These anomalies of motor 
activity are often included in a group of symptoms that are 
called catatonic (automatic obedience, echo actions, ateae oty py ) . 

If flexibilitas cerea is oombined with automatic obedkmce, 
the picture of catalepsy results (see p. 992). 

mild cases, a la^ of gracefulness may be an eaify siga ; 
and in more advanced oases the movanents may bacmaas 
peculiarly stiff and dumsy and finally result, owing to tiw 
addition of tic-like movemozts and distortions and alteratiDM 
of the normal tempo, in the so-called mannerisms, whidt make 
the whole behaviour a]q>ear very eoceniric and bszanre. ai{^ 
mannerisms may be left as a reddual symptom after recovery. 



1043 


SCHIZOPHRENIA 

Some patients are very well aware of their disturbance of 
volition ; but in many instances it is projected and rationalised, 
'so that the patients come to believe that otb^s interfere with 
their decisions and actions, and that their will is under some 
outside control (passivity feelings). The primary disturbances 
of ' volition may be variously elaborated and systematised into 
delusional ideas according to the strength of the paranoid 
tendencies. Many catatonic phenomena are explained by 
patimts as due to the actions of voices. 

TJumght Disorder . — A poverty of ideas mid associations 
may be all that is noticeable at first, bnt a sense of sudden 
interruption or blocking in the stream of thought is more 
characteristic. 

The most important disturbances of thought are seen in the 
schizophrenic association of ideas. In well advanced cases this 
becomes evident in the spontaneous utterances, which sound 
incoherent or entirely incomprehensible, bnt in milder cases 
it may only come to light if the patient is given a set problem, 
or as the result of association tests. 

The thought disorder cannot be reduced to a single 
mechanism, but some of the components, such as condensation 
and displacement of ideas, as well as a tendency to symbolic 
thinking, may be discerned. These all resemble dream 
mechanisms. Hence schizophrenic thinking has been com- 
pared with the type of thinking which many normal people 
experience immediately before they go off to sleep, or w^n 
aeleep. 

The schizophrenic thought disturbance may result in 
“ double orientation.” Thus, a patient may believe he is God 
or the King, and nuiy act and speak accordingly. But at the 
same time he may act and speak as an inmate of a mental 
hospital and will argue with the doctor and complrin about the 
other patients. 

These two lines of thought may be kept up in spite of all 
contradiction ; or they may be interwoven. There is no logic, 
or the logic is peculiar. 

From the subjective point of tdew schizophrenic patients 
may, in the early stages, complain of difficulty in concentration. 
Many such patients turn their attention to subjects that lend 
themsrives to vague speculations such as mystidsm and 
spiritualism, and so-call^ philosophy and psychology ; and 
this is often interpreted as an over-compensation for their 
vaguely felt incapacity. But when the thought disorder 
bewmee worse, tl^ patients usually lose insight gradually. 
Urn thought disorder oolours the various dehnrionai systems. 



1044 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

and is one of the main constituents of the so-called sohizo- 
phi^iic dementia. 

The elements of language may be* well preserved, but various 
mutilations of individual words may occur, so that the verbal 
production of these patients may resemble that of an aphasio. 
In the most severe stages, language is disintegrated into a 
sequence of incomprehensible syllables and neologisms (word 
salad). 

Early cases often show an inclination for highbrow, odd, or 
artificial expressions (mannerisms of speech). Newly coined 
words or neologisms usually result from the patient’s urge to 
describe his experiences, for which prupose an ordinary 
vocabulary is insidequate. 

HaUucinations of any of the senses may be found ; but 
auditory hallucinations are the most frequent and character- 
istic (see p. 999). Their clarity viries. Some patients are 
able to describe the character of the voices in great detail and 
the impression maj^ be so vivid that the patient answers 
hallucinatory questions and discusses the statements of his 
supposed interlocutors. Other patients, although they are 
immediately aware of what the voices say, cannot repeat the 
exact words or otherwise describe the sensory character of 
their experience. The voices are generally disagreeable, 
threatening, aggressive, and abusive, and fi^quently make 
allusions to sexual matters. Sometimes the voices give 
orders that are often carried out to the letter, and hence 
it is always important to determine what hallucinatory orders 
are received. 

The most characteristic type of schizophrenic hallucina- 
tion occurs when the patient hears his own thoughts repeated, 
either immediately before he has conceived them, or simultane- 
ously with the process of thinking, or immediately afterwards. 
In later stages the voices become more incoherent and 
incomprehensible, and neologisms often appear. 

Visual hallucinations are rare (see p. 999). Sometimes 
patients complain that small pictures flash through their 
visual field, or that the objects they see look distorted, or that 
the vividness or quality of what they see has changed. 

Hallucinations of taste and smell are often woven into the 
delusional ideas, in the production of which tactile or other 
physical sensations also play an important part. 

Hypochondriacal self-oonoem is a very important and 
frequent aspect of the patient’s introversion. Panesthaesiss 
and various pains may bo described in detail, and the peculiar 
sensations are often described at first with t^ help of steange 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


1046 


metaphors : thus, feelings as if the body were twisted or as if 
the testes were galvanised. But soon the descriptions lose 
their “as if ” character, and the patients then say that their 
bodies are twisted and that they are galvanised. These 
hallucinations gradually blend into hypochondriacal delusions, 
which typically have a very bizarre character. 

Schizophrenics very commonly complain of feeling influenced 
by rays, or complicate physical devices, or of being the victims 
of all kinds of lewd practices. 

The hallucinations lead to all manner of explanatory 
delusions ; but the characteristic schizophrenic delusions are 
known as “ autochthonous ” delusional ideas (see p. 994). 
These “ primary delusions ” are elaborated, explanations added, 
and the whole starting point of the delusional system may be 
subsequently forgotten. The degree of systematisation and 
elaboration of the schiozphrenic delusimis depend to a large 
extent on the severity of the coexisting thought disorder. Ideas 
of reference and delusions of persecution are the ones most 
commonly foimd, in addition to hypochondriacal delusions. 
Thus, patients come to believe that others are against them, 
that their relatives, the police, or the Jews persecute them, 
until finally everybody is involved in the plot. The passivity 
feelings (see p. 992) are usually given a paranoid twist, and all 
the delusional ideas are often confirmed by the hallucinatory 
experiences. Delusions of grandeur may co-exist with the 
paranoid delusions, but they may also exist independently. 
Thus, the patients often believe they are persecuted because 
they are the possessors of remsu’kable powers, or because they 
are the Messiah. Erotic aspirations towards those of superior 
social status are frequently seen. 

Misinterpretations of the most varied kinds, such as of the 
pictures or advertisements seen in the newspapers, are often 
quoted to confirm the delusional system. 

Although for practical purposes it is much more import- 
ant to distinguish the clinical types, the following entirely 
schematic ch^ification may be useful in rememl^ring the' 
main symptoms : 

1. Symptoms of Withdrawal: Intro'rorsion, h 3 rpochondriasis 

—emotional and habit deterioration — stupor. 

2. Symptoms of Splitting : Double orientation — ambi- 

vidence — thought disturbances and incongruity of 

affect — ^impulsive actions. 

3. Paranoid Symptoms : Projection — ^hallucinations — de- 

lusions. 



1046 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

Clinical Types of Sohisopbfenia. — ^Thiee groups are oommonly 
recognised ; (1) Simple-^hebepbrenitfr (2) Catatonic, (3) 

Paranoid — ^paraphrenic. 

1. Dementia Simplex — Hebephrenic Group . — Dramatio 
s 3 rmptoni 8 are oharaoteristioally absent in the early stages of 
this type, which usually h^ins in late puberty. The pattoit 
shows a falling off of interest and initiative, and the detneasing 
capacity for adaptation to Ordinary life may be disguised in 
hypochondriacal complaints. Sometimes the hebephxenio 
process seems to stop at this stage, leaving behind an odd, dry, 
withdrawn, egocentric hypochondriacal personality as a defijot. 
In other cases the patients show an increasingly poor work 
record, tend to neglect themselves in their pwsoi^ appearance, 
and friction arises with other members of the iandly for no 
apparent reason. The patients lose their self-critioism and 
self-control, and become very exacting or even brutal. This 
behaviour may be difficult to distinguish from the churlishnees 
of adolescence, but usually occurs beyond the age when a 
reaction of pul^rty would be a justifiable explanation. With 
the progress of the illness the withdrawal from reality becomes 
more marked, the hypochondriasis increases and becomes more 
bizarre, evidence of thought disorder becomes noticeable, the 
emotional response becomes more shallow, slightly paranoid 
ideas and finally hallucinations may develop. These sjrmptoms 
are often mask^ by a fatuous euphoria or indifference. 

In other cases the onset is more acute, and the picture of a 
depressive or an anxiety state may be the first evidence of 
illness. But after some months hebephrenic deterioration 
becomes manifest. 

2. Catatonic Group . — ^These psychoses begin somewhat later, 
the majority between the i^es of twenty and tfairty>five. 
There is generally an acute onset, and the clinical piotoie is 
either that of a stupor or of a state of excitement, ^e motor 
symptoms that have been described dominate the picture, and 
the tendmicy to sudden impulsive actions makes those patfents 
most dangerous to themselves and those around them. The 
psychosis may start with on acute state of anxiety or perplexify, 
with an abundance of hallucinations and autochthonous 
delusions. Certain cases of catatonic excitement show manic 
features which may make diagnosis from maniinlepreBsive 
psychoses difficult witibont prolonged observation. 

Catatonic psytffioses usually subside, but the oompleteness 
of the recovery varies, and tlm type and degree of the tesidnal 
defect cannot be foretold until the acute symptoms have fiided. 
Recovery may appear to be comptote and may last for a 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 


1047 


oonskiemble period, but ultimately a reourrenoe usually takes 
plaoe either in the same form, or in a less acute type of 
sohuophxmiia. Be<miTent catatonia is a rather characteristic 
type. Deterioration gmendly becomes manifest after the 
second or tiiird attack, as shown by a shallowness of emotion, 
thought disturbance, or some form of social inadequacy. 

3. Paranoid Group . — ^These psychoses are the latest in 
onset, the majority of them starting in the fourth decade. 
They develop insidiously. Sensitivity and suspicion gradually 
develop into paranoid ideas, and the development of hallucina- 
tk>na completes the picture. The delusions are not generally 
systematised, and various delusions often coexist without 
bmng related or combined. The discrepancy between the 
grotesque delusions, the terrifying hallucinations and the poor 
emotional response which they evoke, is often very striking, 
and this may enable the patient to have some insight into his 
condition. Thus, he may complain : “ I am suffering from 
ideas of persecution ” ; and a German paranoid schizophrenic 
wrote to his physician during the war ; “ I have been given 
the Don Cross. The schizophrenic indifference is appreciated 
in the front line.” 

The name paraphrenic has been given to those sufferers 
from paranoid psychoses who, in spite of nuiqerous hallucina- 
tions and more or lees systematised delusional ideas, yet retain 
th^ personality in a relatively intact state. Thus, the patient 
may show few symptoms of withdrawal or thought disorder, 
and the emotional rapport may remain strikingly good. 
Paraphrenic psyduMee begin later in life than the other paranoid 
psychoses, ofren at the time of the climacteric or the beginning 
of the involutional period. The preservation of the personality 
may be due eitiier to the fact that the pre-psychotic personality 
was of a resistant type, or to the late onset, or to both. 

Paranoia is now r^;arded as a still milder form of paranoid 
schizophrenia, and the picture is that of a well elaborated 
dd.uak>nal system in a personality that is otherwise well 
preserved. Hallucinations are abmnt, but falsifications of 
memmry to fit the patient’s past into his delusional system are 
very common. The dassioal pictiue is very rare, and takes a 
very chronic course. 

Soma paranoiacs live in Iffterty as queer inventors, founders 
of aooeiitrio sects, or as sodal reformers ; but the majority 
am ultimately admitted to mental hosj^tals because of some 
friction witir aoefety. 

These diirical piotaree zepresoit well-known types ; but 
they are not separate entities. When a case is observed for a 



1048 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

sufficient length of time oombinations and permutations can 
usually be observed : catatonic outbursts in simple hebephrenic 
or paranoid states ; paranoid developments in hebephrenia ; 
and hebephrenic deterioration after a catatonic psychosis. 
Observations of this kind provide the decisive argument for 
the close relationship between all the different olinial types of 
schizophrenia. 

PhWioal Findings and Pathology. — Cyanosis of the ex- 
tremities, evidence of endocrine dysfunction and various 
abnormalities of the physical structure are common in all types 
of schizophrenia. The closest association, however, seems to 
be between the asthenic habitus and hebephrenic psychoses. 

Degeneration of the cells of the testis has been described 
in a lai^ proportion of schizophrenics, but no other character- 
istic anatomical findings have been confirmed. 

Biochemical abnormalities are equally elusive, except that 
it would appear that a disturbance of nitrogen excretion 
accompanies certain well defined recurrent cases of stupor and 
catatonic excitement, which enabled Gjessing not only to predict 
the onset of subsequent attacks, but also to abort them by the 
administration of thyroxin to increase the nitrogen excretion. 

Stiology. — Hereditary factors have already been dealt 
with (see p. 988), 

The changes during puberty and sexual'involution appear 
to favour the outbreak of schizophrenia at these periods of 
life. Pregnancy and puerperium are most important additional 
causal factors. Alcoholic hallucinosis has been interpreted as a 
schizophrenic state following upon and coloured by the alcoholic 
intoxication. Schizophrenic pictures may also be provoked 
by cerebro-vascular and senile changes in the brain. 

The importance of psychological factors in precipitating 
schizophrenia is often very clear, and the course of the illness 
may often, to a considerable extent, be modified by psycho- 
logical influences. 

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis. — The most striking 
s 3 nnptoms of schizophrenia do not always possess the highest 
(Uagnostic value. Thought disorder and shallowness of 
emotional response rank first ; autochthonous delusional ideas 
are extremely characteristic ; whereas other kinds of deluskms, 
hallucinations and catatonic symptoms are fiequent in many 
other oonditfons. Yet delusional ideas of a bizarre character, 
pascdvity foelings, and especially the complaint by a patient 
that he heus his own thoughts, are rai^y enoonntoted in 
non-schizophrenic psydboses. So much for tire diagnosis fiNnn 
the examinaifon of patient. 



SCHIZOPHRENIA 1049 

The history and prolonged observation is generally decisive. 
In order to establish the diagnosis of a progressive schizophrenic 
illness it is necessary to discover whether the personality of the 
patient has changed, and if so, whether this change is schizo- 
phrenic in character and whether it may or may not be due to 
environmenal or developmental factors. The more extroverted 
the pre-morbid personality of the patient, the more noticeable 
will be a change towards introversion, seclusion and emotional 
shallowness. On the other hand it may be impossible to 
recognise with certainty minor changes in . this direction in . a 
schiroid, sensitive, shy, shut-in type of personality. In such 
patients it may be difficult or impossible to distinguish mild 
depressions or neurotic reactions from an early schizophrenia. 

The presenting symptoms of a recent schizophrenia may 
closely resemble those of a state of anxiety, depression, or 
panic ; and the diagnosis may only be permitted or suggested 
with the development of additional symptoms, especially 
hallucinations and autochthonous delusions. 

The diagnosis of a catatonic from a manic excitement is 
easy in clear-cut cases. But manic features may be present in 
catatonic states, and then the diagnosis may depend upon the 
presence or absence of cardinal schizophrenic symptoms. 
Isolated catatonic features, however, such as stereotypy and 
grimacing, within a manic picture, must not be regaled as 
decisive evidence for the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Catatonic 
symptoms may also result from vascular brain disease. In such 
oases the discovery of organic signs will decide the diagnosis. 

Toxic oonfusional states may produce pictures very similar 
to schizophrenic psychoses, but clouding of consciousness is 
then a marked feature, whereas it occurs only rarely and 
transiently in the acute form of schizophrenia. 

Prognosis. — The prognosis of the average case coming 
under treatment is very serious. It is possible that the out- 
look is more favourable for mild cases which do not 
come under psychiatric observation. FoUow-up studies, 
conducted ten to twenty years aftor the first outbreak, 
show that about two-thir^ to three-quarters of the patients 
are either dead or permanent inmates of mental hospitals. 
Even after a period as short as three to four years 40 to 60 per 
oent. are social invalids. After such a period about one-thM 
of the patients can be regarded, for all practical purposes, as 
cured ; the remainder are either improved, though not folly 
recovered, or run a periodic course, with relapses and renussions. 
About 36 per oent. of the oases recover or show a oonsidarable 
improvement after the first attack. 



1050 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

The ^gnosis in an individual ease is a mattnr of great 
dif&mlty. An old rule, which still holds good, is tiiat the more 
aente l^e onset, the better the prospect of a renusskm. If tite 
onset is insidions, as is usual in cases of hebephrenia, the 
prognosis is bad. For acute catatonic states the prognosis is 
more hopeful, though the possible physioal complications of 
both exdtement and stupor (exhaustion, physical damage, 
aspiration ^eumonia) must be remembered. Paranoid pictures 
tend to progress, but social adaptation may be possiUe in 
spate of continuance of the s 3 rmptoms. 

The patient’s age is of importance only so far as it jnedisposes 
to particular types of psychoses. A pre-psychotio penioi^ty 
of sohisoid type reacts u^avourably on the outlook, as does a 
sdiizo^iraiio heredity, whereas manic-depressive psychoses in 
the family may point to a remittent course. The prognods 
for patients of a pyknic build is more favourable than for 
those of asthenic physique, or for those who show signs of 
endocrine dysfunction. 

Treatment. — ^As r^iards treatment, the patimits may be 
divided into two clasm ; those in and those outside moital 
hospitals. Again, in mental hospittis, the acute and chronic 
cases require different treatment. For advice as to gmieral 
management, reference may be made to the general section 
on treatinent, page 1006. Chronic oases benefit most by oocopa- 
tionti therapy. Wherever this is carried out by up-to-date 
methods the mute and stiff catatonios who were previously 
so common are not to be seen. With carefully thou|^t out 
treatment and numagement it is possible to bring these patients 
back to some sort of community life. 

In cases of acute excitement continuous narcosis is the 
method of choice. It prevents the patient from exhausting or 
damaging himself and is often followed by an improvement in 
bdiaviour even if other symptoms continue. 

Insulin and convulsion therapy can be said to reduce the 
duration and to improve the outlook of oases of recent origin. 
Knowledge of their effect upon redudng ihe chances of a 
recurrmoe or upon the finti outcome is, Imwever, inoompiete. 
I^ill, the employmaut of one of these therapeutic messniei is 
advisable in freifo oases. These forms of treatinent should only 
be carried out in hospital, sinoe a trained staff and piaotioal 
expmrienoe in tedmiqne are essential, and an acute if traosieBt 
;^iase may be predidtated by Ihmn. 

l%e insulin shook treatinent ocmstits in prodnoing a series 
of hypof^yctemio states and intermptiDg than aAear vacying 
periods by ond or intravenous administiation of f^aeom. Hm 



THE AFFECTIVE SYNDROMES 


1061 


intensity of the hypoglyotemia is gradui^y increased up to 
de^ ooma ; thirty to sixty comas are produced, one ea(di 
day, and treatment is given six days a week. 

The convulsive treatment consists in the production of 
epileptic fits twice or three times a week. This can be done 
by the intravenous injection of a oonvulsant drug (cardiasol, 
azoman), or by electrical stimulation of the brain through the 
intact skull. The more recently introduced electrical method 
seems technically the simplest and the least unpleasant for tire 
patient. Fractures of bones and disturbances of memory have 
been reported after convrilBive therapy, and it must always be 
rememl^red that an epileptic fit is a serious event. 

The relative merits of the methods are still under discussion ; 
but the results claimed for both are equal, namely that a 
recovery rate of over 60 per cent, can be anticipated in cases of 
less than one year’s duration. 

Early oases, without acute symptoms necessitating admission 
to a mental hospital, may benefit from environmental treatment, 
such as change of surroundings and removal of factors which 
tend to produce sensitivity, hypochondriacal or paranoid ideas. 
In mote advanced cases of the hebephrenic type, and in cases 
of schizophrenic defect, the main object of treatmmit is the 
patient’s readjustment to soci^ life. Nothing gives such relief 
to a patient as freeing him from the stress of an occupation 
which he can no longer manage, and putting him to a simple 
task, in which he may once more become a useful member of 
the community. The longer an attack lasts beyond six months 
the less likely is recovery. 


THE AFFECTIVE SYNDROMES 

The increase in knowledge that has taken place during 
noent yearn no longer permits of the clearly cut division 
betwem manic-depressive psychoses, other forms of depression, 
and neuroses, that was formerly deemed to be possible. It 
most be reidised that, although it is necessary for teaching 
and classification to describe the affective reactions undw 
various headings, transitional and mixed states not only can 
be found but occur frequentiy. 

MAiraO-DBFBBSSIVB STATES 

According to the dassioal definition put forward by 
Kraepriin, manio-deimasive psyriiosis is a mental illneas 



1062 PSYCSHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

ohataoterised by emotional fluctuations anid concomitant dis- 
turbances of wUl and thought. Though the prognosis is good 
and there is no residual mental defect, there is, however, a 
marked tendency to relapse. Manic and depressive psychoses 
are grouped together because : (1) they may alternate in the 
same case, (2) some of the striking symptoms may be regarded as 
exact opposites. The symptoms of manic-depressive psychoses 
are both physical and mental and are given in tabular form 
below ; — 

Depressive States. Manic States. 

1. Sadness. 1. Elation. 

2. Motor retardation up to 2. Hyperactivity. 

stupor. 

3. Retarded thinking. 3. Flight of ideas. 

4. Delusions of self-reproach, 4. Delusions of grandeur, 

depersonalisation, hypo- mental and physical, 

chondriasis. 

6. Suicidal ideas. 5. Aggression. 

6. Loss of sexual desire. 6. Increased sexual desire. 

7. Sallow complexion. 7. Ruddy complexion. 

Loss of weight, constipation, insomnia and, frequently, 
amenorrhosa, are found both in manic and depressive states. 

Within the manic-depressive psychoses various t 3 q)e 8 may 
be distinguished : — 

1 . Depression with retardation : classical melancholia which, 
in its most severe forms, passes into depressive stupor. 

2. Hypomania and mania. 

3. Depression without retardation : mixed states with 
anxiety, agitation, and hypochondriacal and paranoid features. 
All these features are common in involutional melancholia. 

The Depre$«ive phase of manic-depressive psychoses (melan- 
cholia) usually b^ins and ends gradually. The cardinal 
symptom is the depressive mood. The patient feels sad, or 
listless and apathetic. Anxiety is frequently combined with 
the depression and the patient complains of pressure in the 
head, preoordial sensations and a sense of oppression m the 
chest or abdomen. 

The mehmcholic mood colours the whole outlook on life — 
past, present and future — ^pessimistically. The patients worry 
about their economic condition and their own prospects, as 
well as those of their wives and children. They tend to turn 
their fears iifto fscts, so that they may come to believe that 
they are financially mined, or that their families are starving, 
sk^, or even dead. This may go on to nihilistio ideas that 



THE AFFECTIVE SYNDROMES 


1063 


are themselves dead and that the world does not exist. But 
these nihilistic ideas may also originate from the- hypo- 
chondriacal pre-occupations that are very common in melan- 
cholics. They complain that their organs do not work, that 
their stomach cannot digest food, that their bowels are blocked, 
that their heart does not beat, that their genital organs are 
decayed. Sometimes instead of feeling that they themselves 
are changed (depersonalisation) the outer world appears 
different (derealisation). In depersonalisation the patient feels 
different from what he used to be, strange, lifeless, detached, 
automatic. In derealisation the outer world looks dead or 
macabre. In “ affective loss ” the patient complains of loss 
of feeling, often given a self-reproachful twist, e.g., he feels 
“ hard hearted.” All transitions and variations may be foimd. 

Melancholic patients are inclined to blame themselves for 
their condition and feelings of guilt* and self-reproach are most 
characteristic features. The patient looks into his past, and 
there finds causes for regret and self-reproach. Falsifications 
of memory on these lines are not infrequent. The self- 
reproachful ideas generally follow the popular views of moral 
and medical causation, and thus the illness is attributed to 
masturbation, or lack of consideration and love, or some other 
“ sin,” real or imaginary. 

Paranoid delusions often develop from the self-reproach, 
so that the melancholic comes to believe others look at him, 
and indicate his unworthiness by word, look or gesture. 
Hallucinations are exceptional, but illusions and misinterpreta- 
tions frequently occur. The paranoid ideas are consistent 
with the mood and appear comprehensible in the light of the 
patient’s attitude and outlook. Obsessional features are often 
present, even when the patient had none before the illness. 

Suicide . — Every melancholic patient must be regarded as 
a suicidal risk and many patients are admitted to hospital 
after suicidal attempts. These patients may plan suicide 
carefully and dissimulate their intentions. Whilst in hospital, 
strangling, hanging and jumping out of the window are the 
favourite methods ; at home patients frequently try to gas 
themselves or to swallow poisons. The morbid fear for the 
future of their dependents sometimes leads to well-intentioned 
homicide before a suicidal attempt, and this may lead to an 
especially tragic situation if the shock of the homicide prevents 
the intention of suicide being carried into effect. Suicide 
would probably be more frequent in melancholic patiente were 
it not that another cardinal symptom, retctrdoHon {vide p. 992), 
has a somewhat antagonistic effect. 



1064 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

The letaidatioii may only be notioeable to the iwtimta 
themselTOB, who find that every thought, word, movement, 
or decision r^oiiee a greater e&rt thw normally. If, how- 
ever, retardation becomes more marked, the slowness may 
become apparrait to the outside observer. In the most severe 
fimn a ooi^tion of melancholic stupor results. 

Retardation cannot be regarded as the simple acoompaoi- 
nwnt of the depressive mood, for the retardation and depression 
may vary independently of one another, and not infi^uenily 
retardation imjuroves b^ore the depression. This explains why 
tile risk of suicide is specially great during the period of 
recovery, even greater than at the height of the illness. Again, 
retardation may be more marked than the depressive effect 
throughout the illness, and it is generally regarded as possessing 
greater diagnostic significance in so far as the midogenous 
type of dejweesion is concerned. The intensity of the symptoms 
may vary with or without an obvious external cause. It is 
very common for depressions to be worse in the morning and 
to improve somewhat towards the evening. This morning and 
evening variation is often connected with the disturbance of 
sleep, but many patients complain of feeling worse after a 
good night. 

The insomnia of depression is characteristic in that the 
difficulty is not so much in going off to sleep, as in waking 
op early. Sexual desire is diminished or absent, and impotence 
is frequent, evra in tiie early stages, which may lead to hypo- 
ohondhiacal and self-reproachful elaboration. Loss of wedi^t 
is another very constant feature, and althou|^ the loss of 
iqipetite usually leads to reduced intake, it can be shown tiiat 

does not wholly account for it. 

Other physical findings are of less importance. The blood 
pressure tmi^ to be somewhat higher ti^ is normal for the 
individnal, and nearly all dejnessives complain of constipation. 

Mild forms of melancholia may be disguised as “oi|pm 
neuroses,” *.e., vague complaints of indigestion, constipation 
and preoordial sensations may be the most oomqaououa 
qnmptoms. doser investigation may disclose insomnia, and 
a eertain amount of reta^tion with or without manife st 
depeession. A history of prerious phases of numia or depresskm 
may be elicited. 

Mtmia . — ^In many respects the symi^ms of mania may be 
regarded as the exact opf^tes of the symptoms of mehuieholia. 
The dominating aMect is elation, tod the patimits are gay, 
dbeeafttl and feel better thmr ever before. But ttey are oiUBtk 
irritable as well and this may be one oi tihe most peomment 



THE AFEECrriVE SYNDROMES 1066 

throughout. Sleeplessness and irritsbility are often 
the first symptoms. These emotional symptoms are coupled 
with oyeraotmty. The patiente start to do more, undertake 
larger enterptisee and indulge in greater risks. The increasing 
number of these new enterprises soon makes it difficult for 
any one to be comj^ted. In seyere cases, activity becomes 
disommected and pmposeless. Impulses follow one another 
in rapid succession, and the manic patient can brook no 
interference or restriction and becomes aggressive and violent. 
At the height of manic excitement, consciousness may be 
dimmed and the patient may become completely exhausted. 
Flight of ideas as opposed to retardation is the oharact^islio 
disturbance, and the patients talk, shout, or sing incessantly. 
Jokes and rhymes, accompanied by vivid and expressive 
movements, are poured forth. Manic patients are very dia- 
traetible and weave everything they see or hear into their 
utterances. Qrandiose ideas may be developed, but are usually 
put forward in a jocular vein. Some make hypochondriacal 
eomjdaints, but utter them with manic vigour. Hallucinations 
are tare, and if present, are in keeping with the grandiose ideas 
and the ^ted mood. The increased sexual desire and lack of 
inhibition may result in all sort of difficulties. Manics may 
for a time present the picture of perfect health, but soon signs 
of exhaustion and starvation become evident. 

Hypomania shows the same symptoms as mania, but to 
a lesew degree. It is therefore more difficult to recognise, and 
it is often most difficult to convince a lay person or a judge 
that the cheerfulness, overactivity, lack of control, and argu- 
mentative irritability are evidence of a morbid conditicm. 

Manio-deinressive states do not always conform to the 
clasaioal pictiire that has just been describe. 

It k most important to bear in mind the possibility of 
tamor iMaeks, and a carefully taken history will oftoa reveal 
mild iffiases of depression or elation that were never regarded 
aa illnesses at all. 

Again, the symptoms may appear in different ooml»natk>ns 
to those seen in classical melancholia usd mania. Ibe existence 
of timse intermediate or mixed forms is shown very convincingly 
in manic stupor. In this extremely rare condition patients may 
eadiibit a most striking lack of maipfest activity ; but after 
moovery they describe their euphoria and flight of ideas which 
they WMe nimble to express owing to their extmne motor 
letiUEdatkm. 

Dtqiressions witiuwi retardation or even with excitement 
(agifttfsrf msianehciia) can also be regarded as examplea of 



1066 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


mixed forms which, however, have great practical importance 
because of their fr^uency. They are most commonly seen in 
the involutional period, but can also occur at a younger age. 
These patients are tense, anxious and fearful rather than sad, 
and the corresponding affects colour or dominate the clinical 
picture, which can be that of extreme restlessness and agitation 
with much sobbing, wringing of hands, and incessant complaint 
and lamentation. Owing to their lack of retardation they can 
be dangerously suicidal. 

An absence of retardation is also often regarded as one of 
the most characteristic features of eocogenous depression, but 
the difference between exogenous and endogenous depressions 
on this point — ^as in aU other respects — ^is one only of degree. 
The symptoms in a typical exogenous depression follow immedi- 
ately upon some event which makes the reaction comprehensible 
in the light of the patient’s personality and circumstances, the 
abnormality of the emotional reaction consisting in its duration 
and intensity. Throughout • the illness the patient is only 
concerned with this causative event or situation and its possible 
consequences. Thus he will brood over how it came about or 
might have been prevented, blaming himself or, more typically, 
others for sins of omission and commission. Finally, an 
improvement in, or adaptation to, external circumstances 
tends to lead to a more rapid recovery than is seen in 
endogenous conditions. 

Few patients fulfil all these criteria for an exogenous depres- 
sion, and the number is further reduced if the latent fallacy of 
a “ spurious psychogenesis ” (see p. 980) is clearly recognis^. 

Involutional depression is often diagnosed (a) if the illness 
starts about the involutional period, and (6) if the patient has 
never previously suffered from a manic or depressive phase. 
The main features are agitated depression with much appre- 
hension and anxiety, hypochondriacal ideas, often of a bizarre 
character, a preoccupation with the theme of death, and various 
paranoid reactions and paranoid delusional formations. The 
usual depressive delusions may be present as well. Exactly 
the same clinical picture may, however, occur in manic- 
depressive states at this time of life, in which the original 
personality is probably an important determinant. 

OouM. — C^uaes of classical recurrent type usually start 
between the twenty-fifth and fortieth year. Depressive states 
are mote frequent than manic, and in more than two-Hiirds 
the first attack is a depression. Two-thirds of the cases recover 
completely ; the rest swing over into the opposite phase before 
reoovmy. A considerable number have only one clear-cnt 



THE AFPECnVE SYNDROMES 1057 

attack. It is impossible to predict what intervals will elapse 
between attacks in those that have recurrent illnesses. The 
duration of individual attacks varies enormously. As a rule 
they last between six and eight months, but attacks of two 
or three weeks’ duration may occur, as well as those that last 
two or three years. In the interval, the patients appear well, 
although mild hypomanic features may be noticed by relations 
after depressive illness, or some moroseness after a manic state. 
Aifter several attacks, such alternations in mood may be 
observed more frequently, and it is then sometimes difiScult 
to judge whether these patients suffer from a series of minor 
mood fluctuations, o|* from a definite change of personality. 

The Prognosis* — ^For the, individual attack the prognosis is 
good, but recurrence is probable. Advanced age, arterio- 
sclerotic features, or atypical (schizophrenic) psychoses in the 
family, are all points that should lead to greater prognostic 
reserve. Retardation is the symptom which has the highest 
correlation with a good prognosis. 

The prognosis is always more serious if the first attack 
occurs at the involutional period. The duration of an 
involutional depression is often given as between nine and 
twelve months, but many cases last a much longer time. As 
has been pointed out, the course and duration of an exogen- 
ous (neurotic) depression are more closely related to the event 
or situation which was responsible for its production. It must, 
however, be remembered that both manic and melancholic 
states of endogenous type may be precipitated by emotional 
shock or stress, and the subsequent illness may last as long as 
did previous attacks which were not so precipitated. The 
characteristic feature of these endogenous illnesses, precipitated 
by psychological factors, is that the content tends to lose 
connection with the precipitating event. These points must, 
however, be taken as guiding principles rather than as rigid 
rules, for even in the most endogenous cases, the content of 
the depression must necessarily be determined to a considerable 
extent by the patient’s pa^ exx)erieiice and circumstances ; 
and even when a depression appears psychologically compre- 
hensible as a reaction to some external event, the t3rpe of the 
patient’s response is largely affected by constitutional factors. 
It is therefore necessary to study each case individually before 
the relative importance of constitutional and environmental 
factors, and their bearing on the prognosis, can be assessed. 

Aitiology. — ^The constitutional factors are demonstrated in 
the heredity, in the pre-morbid personality, and in the patient’s 
physique. Manic-depressive psychoses are much more frequent 
67 



1068 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

in women than in men. The climacteric is an important 
precipitating factor. A certain number of oases develop after 
childbirth. It is now recognised that there is no specific 
puerperal insanity and bre^downs occurring at this time 
may be of any type. It is not rare to hear from patients that 
they were always liable to mild depressions at the time of their 
menstrual periods. In other cases the onset occurs after severe 
infections, especially influenza. Manic-depressive psychoses are 
quite frequently precipitated by strokes, and this lends some 
colour to the belief that severe head injuries may be important 
as well. There is little doubt that the psychological situations 
arising out of accidents — ^mutilation, prolonged hospitalisation, 
loss of employment — ^may caiise depressions, but hysterical 
elements o^n predominate in such cases. The importance 
of psychological factors and experiences has already been 
mentioned. 

Differential Diagnosis. — ^The differential diagnosis between 
the various types of depression can be limited to the assessment 
of the relative importance of endogenous and environmental 
factors. Hysterical and obsessional features are not inconsistent 
with the diagnosis of depression, but they are of great 
importance for the prognosis in the individual case. Affective 
pictures may disguise the early stages of schizophrenia. 
Retardation and schizophrenic anergia must be carefully 
distinguished. Hypochondriacal and paranoid ideas, if in 
keeping with the affective state, also do not preclude the 
diagnosis^ but if they become bizarre or incomprehensible in 
the light of the prevailing mood, they point to a schizophrenic 
illness. Again, shallowness of affect should arouse the suspicion 
of schizop^nia. Demonstrative statements of being depressed 
may be part of an hysterical reaction. Depressive pictures 
also occur in organic conditions such as general paralysis. 
High blood pressure, or evidence of arterial thickening, should 
suggest the possible role of vascular disease, but organic 
dementia is often difficult to demonstrate if retardation 
dominates the picture. Manic states must be distinguished 
from catatonic excitement ; a euphoric mood, contact with 
the surroundings, and disbractibility are in favour of the former 
diagnosu ; whereas stereotypy, mannerisms, and negativism 
speak for sohizo{direnia. As with depressive pictures, the 
possibility of organio oonditionB, such as gmieral paralysis, must 
be borne in mind. 

Zreatment. — ^Any physical factors must, of course, be dealt 
with in so far as this is possible. The management, psycho- 
logical treatment, and p^ohotherapy in general have been 



THE AFFECTIVE SYNDROMES 1069 

dealt witli elsewhere (jnde p. 1008). All depressive patients 
require reassurance, and mild cases usually respond well to it. 
As a general rule it can be said that the more rea^ctive the 
case ^e more is psychotherapy indicated that includes a 
thorough psychological investigation of the patient’s prob- 
lems and their reformulation with a view to helping in his 
readjustment. 

^me chronic depressionis, particularly those of the in- 
volutional t3rpe, seem to resxKtnd well to convulsion therapy. 
This form of treatment should therefore be considered when 
a depression is largely endogenous in origin and shows no sign 
of improvement after several months. But it does not seem 
justified to submit every mild depression or states which are 
mainly psychogenic to this form of treatment, which does entail 
some risk of cerebral and other physical damage. 

Anxiety States 

Anxiety is a s 3 miptom which may occur in any psychi- 
atric syndrome. In some affective reactions, however, the 
anxiety s}mdrome occurs in more or less pure culture. 
The ambiguous term “ anxiety hysteria ” is better avoided 
altogether. Anxiety, if used as a psychiatric term, denotes 
a condition of fear not clearly focussed on any special ob- 
ject, accompanied by striking physical signs similar to those 
produced by the secretion or increased output of adrenalin, 
such as dilation of the pupils, rapid pulse, palpitations, rise in 
blood pressure, sweating, pallor, and tremor. The patients 
may complain of these physical effects when they intrude upon 
consciousness, or of other sensations more or less closely con- 
nected with what may be called the “ adrenalin syndrome ” : 
dryness of the mouth, feelings of choking or suffocation, sigh- 
ing, restlessness, fatigue, weakness in ^e limbs, feelings of 
fainting, frequency of micturition or of other sensations due 
to a more or less general vegetative upset. The sensations of 
suffocation may induce overbreathing, which may in its turn 
lead to the symptoms of hyperventilation tetany, such as 
tingling in the fingers and toes, muscular spasm, and finally 
some blurring of consciousness. The symptoms of an anxiety 
state are often, of course, further increased by self-observation 
and misinterpretation, leculing to the development of a vicious 
circle. 

Anxiety may occur in acute attacks, the filrst of which can 
often be traced back to some special experience. Subsequent 
attacks may then be provoked by any happraing whidi comes 



1060 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


to be associated with the original trauma ; more and more 
events come to be so a^ciated, so that finally the “ conditioned 
reflex ” is set going by some very slight stimulus with no 
obvious connection at all. This episodic or recurrent t]rpe of 
anxiety meiges into the chronic anxiety state where the same 
symptoms, ^ough generally milder in degree and varying in 
intensity, continue for long periods. Sufferers from episodic 
or recurring types of anxiety are seldom completely free from 
s3miptom8 in the inteivals between their attach, but are 
irritable, tense, dissatisfied, and unhappy. 

The term “ anxiety state ” should not be applied too loosely 
to any case that shows the symptoms. This mistake is often 
made, so that a large number of conditions are included that 
should be dealt with separately. Thus, as has already been 
mentioned, anxiety may be the predominant affect in depres- 
sive or schizophrenic illnesses. Again, patients who suffer from 
phobias, as the result of which they fear to do something lest 
anxiety may supervene, are better described under the head- 
ing of “ obsessional neuroses,” to which they are clinically 
related by other features. Finally, anxiety states and their 
physical accompaniments may be intensified or prolonged by 
psychological mechanisms of an hysterical type, involving 
some secondary gain, t.e., the wish to escape from some difficult 
situation. Thus anxiety states can, and often do, blend into 
hysterical reactions, just as do certain physical illnesses, as 
when organic paralyses are complicated or prolonged by 
hysterical developments and mechanisms. The term “ organ 
neuroses ” is often used when the main symptomatic emphasis 
is concentration upon some one or other of the physical accom- 
paniments of anxiety. It must, however, be stressed that not 
adl ” organ neuroses ” are of this type. Some may be regarded 
quite simply as abnormal “ conditioned reflexes,” others are 
clearly hysterical from the start, either because they express 
some emotion metaphorically, or because they serve some 
personal puijK>se. Anxiety symptoms are only biologically 
and not personally purposive. The choice of the particular 
organ affected may be determined psychologically ; but more 
commonly there is a constitutional factor in the choice. The 
physiological accompaniments vary firom person to person, as 
doM the response to adrenalin. It is probable that, of all the 
“ organ rmuroses,” tiie cardiac neuroses bear the closest relation- 
ship to Mudety states, for the accelerated or forceful action 
of the heart is pecnliarly prone to make a striking impression 
upon the patient’s mind. As he is often inclined to “ repress " 
tl^ real cause of his anxiety, he readily finds his way to the heart 



1061 


THE AFFECTIVE SYNDROMES 

specialist to whom is often left not only the differential 
diagnosis but the treatment of these states. In the same 
way it is probable that the striking physical accompani- 
ments of sexual excitement account for the ready conversion 
of psychological disturbance in the sex life into the symptoms 
of anxiety. 

iEtiology. — ^The physical accompaniments of anxiety have 
been experienced by nearly everybody. Although the threshold 
varies, the symptoms of an acute attack of anxiety can be 
produced in the most normal individual when a sufficiently 
large dose of adrenalin, caffeine, benzedrine or some similar 
drug is injected. The development of the symptoms of anxiety 
is therefore a potentiality which we all possess, and this may 
explain why anxiety states should be the most common of aD 
the neurotic reactions and the least dependent upon the con- 
stitutional background. It is imiiortant to bear in mind the 
general principles of psychiatric aetiology which were outlined 
on page 979. As regards psychogenesis, the psychoanalytical 
school has proffered the formula “morbid anxiety means un- 
satisfied love.” That this can be the correct explanation in 
certain cases need not be doubted ; but it is generaUy held 
that this formula is too narrow, and that any conflict endanger- 
ing the moral or social standards of the individual can result 
in the production of anxiety states. The war neuroses have 
demonstrated this on a large scale. The sufferers are usually 
unaware of the true nature of their conflicts or at least do not 
face them openly. They hence tend to turn their attention 
to their less vital problems, namely, their symptoms. This 
indicates the line of treatmeTit that should be adopted. The 
patient has to he led to realise the shifting of emphasis that has 
taken place. The reassurance that “ there is nothing organically 
wrong with him ” is necessary ; but this only constitutes the 
first step. The patient has to be led to realise the true basis 
of his difficulties and to readjust his standards to the require- 
ments of his social environment in so far as the latter cannot 
be adjusted by him or for him . In the treatment of the individual 
anxiety attack the importance of the physical factors suggests 
an approach from the physical side. Drug treatment is indicated 
not only on theoretical grounds but also because of its success 
in practice. Bromides and hypnotics are of great benefit to 
the patient, and may indeed be necessary to tide him over 
the acute stage in which he will not l>e accessible to psycho- 
therapy. Ill the severe cases of terror and panic as observed 
during the war, continuous narcosis has proved to be the most 
efficient method for this purpose. 



1062 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


Hysterical Reactions 

The term “ hysteria ” or “ hysterical ” is very ambiguous 
and often loosely applied in clinical usage and literature. It 
is commonly co^us^ with the conception of “ psychogenic,” 
or, in other words, is employed to denote everything that 
is psychological in origin. It should, however, be restricted 
to those psychogenic reactions which are kept going for the 
sake of some gain which the illness brings in solving some 
problem, or in fulfilling some wish, or in satisfying some desire 
in reality or in phantasy. In brief, it should be restricted to 
those psychogenic reactions which serve some personal purpose. 
This definition excludes such symptoms of psychological origin 
which are merely exaggerated accompaniments or metaphorical 
expressions of normal or abnormal emotions. The conception 
of psychogenic is therefore a wider one than that of hysterical, 
and includes such reactions as vomiting as an expression of 
disgust. This need not be hysterical, but becomes so if it is 
used for such a purpose as getting rid of a pregnancy. The 
patient is never clearly aware of this motive. The amount 
of repression that is seen in hysterical reactions varies greatly, 
and all transitions between hysterical reactions and frank 
malingering occur. It would, however, be a mistake to suppose 
that frank malingering is at all common, for, ae has been rightly 
said, this would be a naive underestimate of the capacity of 
human beings to believe what they think is in their own 
interest. 

i&tiology. — Hysterical symptoms usually develop on the 
basis of some predisposition, constitutional or acquired. The 
predisposition may be greatly increased by experiences, especi- 
ally the experiences of early life. Hysterical reactions are more 
common in women than in men, puberty is a favourite period, 
and emotional immaturity is often a striking feature of 
hysterical patients. The secondary sexual characteristics are 
j^quently under-developed. Abnormal suggestibility on the 
mental side and lability of the vegetative system on the physical 
side are characteristic findings. Together they are probably 
responsible for the readiness with which hysterics convert 
p^chological into physical symptoms. This ” conversion ” is 
a normal psydiophysiological happening ; we know, however, 
very little about the actual mech^ism. 

The hystocical pmsonality has been described on page 1018. 
The ffymptoms of an hysterical iUness may be either physioal, 
or nmntal, or both. Physical leymptoins may imitate those of 



THE APPECJnVE SYNDROMES 1063 

almost any type of illness. H 3 rsterical blindness, dea&ess, loss 
of cutaneous sensation, paralyses, spasms, tremors are some 
of the usual gross manifestations, the difierential diagnosis of 
which will be found in the description of the corresponding 
physical diseases. But the hysterical imitation of an illness 
is generally a very rough one, since it corresponds to the idea 
that the patient has of the symptoms of the illness. Thus, 
hysterical ansesthesias are generally of the glove and stocking 
type, i.e., they are limited to what the patients think is 
a functional unit. With the spread of medical knowledge 
among the general population, gross physical manifestations 
tend to decrease at the expense of vaguer and subtler com- 
plaints, such as headaches, giddiness, or feelings of faintness. 
Patients as a rule adopt a characteristic attitude towards 
their symptoms, either putting up with them with the classical 
“ belie indifference," or demonstrating them ostentatiously. 
There are all transitions between trembling, shaking, and 
twitching, and the hysterical fit, the manifestations of which 
may be greatly changed by external circumstances, another 
aspect of the increased suggestibility. Thus, the t 3 rpical 
stages described by Charcot were certainly an artefact of 
the Salpetrifere atmosphere. The motor phenomena often 
utilise physiological mechanisms, and it is, therefore, often 
difficult to distinguish between hysterical and extra-pyramidal 
symptoms, such as choreiform movements. In other instances 
the fit starts by overbreathing, and is coloured by phenomena 
due to the disturbed acid-base balance, such as clouding of 
consciousness and tetany, or kindred symptoms. Simple vaso- 
motor collapse (fainting), though not hysterical in itself, may 
be used witl^ an hysterical neurosis. The distinction between 
the hysterical and epileptic fit is discussed on page 884. 

The mental manifestations of hysteria are twilight states, 
ixanoes, fugues and hjrsterioal amnesia. The firequent utilisation 
of anxiety symptoms as part of an hysteric^ reaction has 
already b^n stressed. 

HysUnrical Twilight States (often called Ganser) are mainly 
observed in prisons. They consist of a mild disturbance of 
oonsoiousness and the symptoms are such as a lay person 
imi^lines a lunatic to show. Answers to all questions are so 
beside the point, or wrong in such a way, as to give a dear 
indication that the correct answer must exist somewhere in the 
patient’s mind. Sometimes the condition passes into hysterical 
stupor, which may be difficult to distinguish from oatatonio 
stupors, though generally vital functions are not so involved 
as in the latter condition. The discovery of situations which 



1064 PSYCffOLOGICAL MEDICDfE 

the patients had to face, but which they try to evade, may be 
helpful in the diagnosis, but it must be remembered that 
catatonic psychoses may also be precipitated by imprisonment, 
or the mental stress of the legal procedure. 

A Trance is a dreamlike state which may be produced by 
suggestion or by emotional shock. Physical factors may assist 
in its production, as when small doses of hypnotics are given 
to make the patient drowsy, or after hyperventilation which 
normally produces a mild alteration of consciousness. The 
mechanism for the production of trance may be facilitated by 
practice, and some mediums readily pass into this condition. 
During trance, so-called automatic actions may be carried out, 
sensory perception may be altered, and hallucinations may be 
experienced. There is often a very vague recollection after- 
wards, or there may be a complete amnesia. 

The term hysterical ftigtie is used for patients who wander 
whilst in such states ; they may be found far from their own 
homes, not knowing who they are or how they got there. 
Adequate reasons for such disappearances can usually be 
discovered. 

Pathogenesis . — Many theories have been put forward to 
explain the mechanism of the hysterical reactions, some psycho- 
logical, some physical, and some a mixture of both. It must 
be assumed that the physical symptoms have a physiological 
basis, and some of the physical mechanisms at work can be 
demonstrated. Yet a psychological factor is always necessary 
to set these physical mechanisms going, and in hysterical 
reactions there is always a flight into illness, or a defence 
mechanism with the object of gaining security or justification, 
that is not fully obvious to the patient. 

A satisfactory and general solution of the problem as to 
how psychological factors become converted into physical 
symptoms is as impossible as an explanation of the relationship 
fa^ween mind and body. The symptoms may be explained 
as the results of suggestion, but for this a condition of increased 
suggestibility must be assumed ; or the reactions may be 
regarded as analogous to conditioned reflexes that are ground 
in by repeated elicitation. According to psycho-analytical 
views, the 83 rmptomB are due to affective energy ori^udly 
belonging to some repressed material, and the symptoms 
produced express syml^licidly the repressed wishes or their 
gratification. It should be borne in mind that a medical 
examination increases suggestibility, and that hysterical mani- 
festations are not infrequency the direct residt of medical 
mis man agement. In particular, cutaneous amesthesia and 



THE AFFECTIVE SYNDROMES 1065 

visual field defects are often artefacts due to the suggestive 
influence of an (unskilled) medical examination. 

Prognosis . — ^The prognosis of the individual hysterical 
reaction is good, but the prognosis for the hysterical disposition 
is more serious and more difficult to assess. The disproportion 
between the stimulus and the reaction in the present illness 
or in previous illnesses, should these have occurred, may be 
used as a guide. Patients who have broken down in response 
to a negligible stress are more likely to relapse than those 
who are defeated by a severe strain. When frequent hysterical 
reactions have been shown, the outlook for the future becomes 
worse, and a marked hysterical character (see p. 1018) makes 
the prognosis more grave. Hysterical reactions in childhood 
or adolescence are less serious. Individual attacks yield more ‘ 
readily to adequate treatment, and the predisposition towards 
an hysterical response may be influenced firom the environ- 
mental side, and very often diminishes or disappears after 
puberty. 

Differential diagnosis of hysterical symptoms of a physical 
kind may be very difficult, especially when an organic lesion 
existed originally which is exaggerated or prolonged by hysterical 
mechanisms. The distinction between hysterical and epileptic 
fits has been discussed on page 884. Hysterical tics, tremors and 
twitchings may be very similar to choreic or to extra-pyramidal 
syndromes. The influence of emotions and suggestions on the 
symptoms must be observed carefully, afid a sound knowledge 
of neurology is necessary. The greatest difficulties are met with 
in those cases with organic lesions that recover, where, however, 
the loss of function is maintained by hysterical mechanisms, 
as is frequently seen in disseminated sclerosis. 

Treatmeni . — ^Hysterical mechanisms are a field for suggestive 
therapy of every kind, but the symptoms are likely to recur 
in the same or in a different form unless an attack is made 
on the basic psychological problems, or unless the environ- 
mental stress diminishes. It is therefore necessary to analyse 
the difficulties that have been experienced in the adaptation 
to life, and it should be remembered that hysterical qualities 
may be of value in the patient's readaptation. Many hysterics 
do very well in positions where they may play-act, or duly 
come in for self-demonstration or sacrifice, or where work 
permits them to find such attachments as they were previously 
unable to form. 

War neuroses and compensation netiroses are special examples 
of hysterical reaction. In the former instance the wish to stay 
away from the fighting Services, and in" the latter the attempt to 



1066 PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 

obtain or to keep compensation, clearly provide reasons why 
the morbid symptoms remain. The symptoms of these neuroses 
are the same as those found in other hysterical conditions, 
but are often much less dramatic in presentation, and may 
be mixed with those of an anxiety state. Fugues and amnesias 
have been found to be relatively frequent types of reaction in 
this war, and usually respond well to narco-analysis so far as 
the removal of the symptoms is concerned. Compensation 
neuroses seldom improve while any uncertainty as to the 
compensation remains, and if they do not improve after that, 
a thorough investigation of the patient’s life becomes necessary, 
and rea^ptation according to the result of this should be 
attempted, aided by suggestive treatment for the particular 
' symptoms that are shown. 

Obsessional States 

Obsessions have been defined as “ contents of consciousness 
which, when they occur, are accompanied by the experience 
of subjective compulsion, which cannot be got rid of, though 
on quiet reflection they are recognised as senseless ” (K. 
Schneider). 

Minor obsessional symptoms, such, as having to count 
objects, are not unknown among normal individuals. All 
children tend to ritualise, and nearly all of os have our scruples, 
and indulge in a special order when we dress or undress. 

Obsessions are generally divided into obsessional ideas, 
impulses and phobias, and, as has been mentioned, the latter 
bear a close relation to anxiety and anxiety states. The 
object of the phobia varies and some types have been given 
special names, such as claustrophobia, agarophobia or even 
erythrophobia, or fear of blushing. Fears of bacteria, or of 
swallowing harmful substances, or of being soiled, or of 
touching knives are other typical examples. 

Obsessional impulses show the same variety. Some patients 
feel forced to touch everything, or to count or to arrange 
things in a special order. Impulses to commit suicide or 
homicide are generally mastered unless the obsessional state 
is complicated by the features of some other syndrome, such 
as depression. Obsessional patients, in contrast to schizo- 
phrenics, stmg^ against their impulses. Many patwnts 
elaborate defence mechanisms against their obse^onal im- 
pulses, mid substitute more harness actions for those that 
cause them fear. There is a tendency fiur these ceremonials 
to become more and more oomplicidied, wUch midtes the 



THE AEPECnVE SYNDROMES 1067 

behaviour of many patients with obsessions appear very odd. 
Similar oeremonie^ and defence mechanisms develop out of 
phobias, and patients with a fear of dirt or disease may feel 
impelled to wash themselves whenever they touch anything ; 
others wear gloves or adopt more complicated devices. Com- 
pulsive utterances may also occur, sometimes consisting of 
meaningless words or phrases, but very often having a manifest 
or very slightly disguised content of an obscene kind. The 
impulse to swear, or to blaspheme, or to be obscene, may be 
aroused by religious pictures or crucifixes. The obsessional 
ideas and thoughts may be verbal or musical, or may take the 
form of visual imagery or pictures. The repetition of meaning- 
less phrases or questions such as : “ Why is that so ? ” “ Why 
is God ? ” “ \^y is the world ? ” “ Why is not nothing ? ” 
may become a torture. Others develop doubts and scruples 
about what they have done, or should do, and must return 
constantly to see whether the door is shut or the gas trimed 
off but the doubt still remains. They have to repeat calcula- 
tions and make careful notes to see that aJl is done in proper 
order. One patient felt impelled to write out the next day’s 
programme in shorthand the night before, taking some hours 
over this task. 

Etiology. — The pre-morbid personality of obsessional 
patients frequently shows minor obsessional traits. But these 
and similar traits not only occur in those who never become 
mentally ill, but also occur in patients who develop mental 
illnesses that are not of an obsessional type. This makes the 
sstiologioal significance of such factors rather limited. Heredity 
plajrs an important part, and one-third of the parents of 
obsessional patients and one-fifth of their siblings have pro- 
nounced obsessional traits. The obsessional symptoms can often 
be traced back to wishes and experiences that have given rise 
to painful emotions, and have therefore been repressed. The 
repression is kept up by the strict self-discipline that is so 
oharaoteristio of the obsessional person. These psychological 
considerations do not explain why the results of repression 
take an obsessional form, and it is usually assumed that they 
develop on a constitutional background. But obsessional 
s}rmptoms may occur in organic brain disease in 'patients who 
have shown no sign of constitutional predisposition. The 
close connection between obsessions and paroxysmal neuro- 
logical symptoms, such as the oculogyric crises of post- 
encephalitic Parkinsonism, makes it probable that in these 
oases there is a dose connection between the psychological 
uid physiologtcal events. 



1068 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


Prognosis . — ^The prognosis for an obsessional illness depends 
on the setting in which it occurs. When obsessional symptoms 
are present or when obsessional chuacteristics become more 
acute within the setting of a depressive state, the prognosis 
is good. Certain patients have one or more recurrent obsessional 
upsets without much evidence of depression. But when the 
onset is gradual, the progress slow, and when the symptoms 
tend to become more utd more elaborate, the prognosis is 
poor. Severe obsessional symptoms may preclude the patient 
firom all work and social activity, and induce a life of 
seclusion scarcely to be distinguished from that of a schizo- 
phrenic iUness. Severe obsessional symptoms in youthful 
individuals not infrequently pass into a definitely schizophrenic 
illness later. 

In a follow-up study, made many years after discharge 
upon an iinselected group of obsessional patients, it was foimd 
that one-half were well, one-third stationary or worse, and the 
remainder ran a fluctuating course (Aubrey J. Lewis). 

The differential diagnosis in chronic obsessional neuroses 
frx>m schizophrenia may be difficult, for the emotional response 
of such patients is often poor and queer. It is essential 
for the correct diagnosis that the criteria for an obsession 
should be fulfilled, and that the compulsion should be fought 
against, and not projected as something coming firom the 
outer world. 

The treatment will depend on the setting. Patients with 
depressive components must be treated like depressive states. 
A carefully plaimed regime assists some patients to overcome 
their difficulties, and a change of surroundings — such as 
admission to hospital — often leads to some improvement. 
Prolonged psychotherapy can hardly claim more therapeutic 
success than that achieved by the more reserved activity of 
an out-patient department. 


THE LEGAL ASPECTS OP MENTAL ILLNESS 

Admission 07 Patients to Mental Hospitals 

A patient may be admitted to a mental hospital, or 
other premises approved by the Board of Control, (1) as a 
voluntary patient, (2) as a temporary patient, and (3) as a 
certified patient. 

1. Admisiion m a Yoltmtary Patient.— The patient has to 
sign a form of application expressing the desire to be treated 
as a volnntmry patient, with the understanding that, should 



THE LEGAL ASPECTS OF MENTAL ILLNESS 1069 

he desire to l^ve, he may do so on giving seventy-two hours’ 
written notice to that effect. No other formalities are required. 
If the patient is tmder the age of sixteen, a parent or guardian 
has to sign the form of application which, in this case, must 
be accompanied by a medical recommendation. 

2. Admission as a Temporary Patient. — ^This method also 
avoids certification, but is only applicable to a patient with 
a good prognosis who is likely to benefit from the treatment, 
and who is “ incapable of expressing himself as willing or 
unwilling to receive such treatment.” Unfortunately only a 
small percentage of patients fulfil these criteria. 

An application has to be made by the husband, or wife, or 
near relation, and two medical recommendations are required, 
one to be signed by a medical practitioner approved by the 
Board of Control for the purpose, the other, if possible, by 
the patient’s ^lsaal medical attendant. The practitioners may 
examine the patient separately, but within seven days of each 
other, or together ; and the medical recommendations are 
valid for fourteen days after the date of the later of the two 
examinations. 

The primary period of detention must not exceed six 
months, but if signs of impending recovery are evident, the 
detention may be extended, by three-monthly periods, up to 
a year from the date of admission. 

3. Admission as a Certified Patient. — ^There are four 
methods of certification in England, and it is convenient to 
consider them (A) as applicable to private patients and (B) 
as applicable to rate-aided patients, i.e., patients who cannot 
afford to go to private institutions, but must go to rate-aided 
hospitals. 

A. For Private Patients. — (1) By Reception Order on 
Petition . — Five separate documents are required : — 

(а) A petition addressed by the nearest relation to the 

appropriate judicial authority, usually a Justice of 
the Peace, especially authorised for the purpose. 

(б) A Statement of Particulars, i.^., age, profession, etc., 

of the patient. 

(c) and (d) Two Medical Certificates, one of which should, 
if possible, be signed by the patient’s usual medical 
attendant. The mecfioal examinations must be 
carried out separately, amd must be made within 
seven dajrs of the presentation of the petition. 

(c) The Reception Order, which must be signed by the 
judicial authority to whom the petition is presented. 



1070 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


(2) By Urgency Order. — ^Three documents are necessary, 
but are all avt^ble on one form : — 

(а) The Urgency Order addressed to the Medical Superin- 

tendent, or person in charge of the institution, to 
which the patient is sent. This must be signed by 
the nearest available relative. 

(б) A Statement of Particulars, as in (1). 

(c) One Medical Certificate. 

The Urgency order remains in force for seven days, and 
during this period the patient may be discharged, or alterna- 
tively, he may be certified according to the procedure laid 
down in (1). 

This method has great value when the problem of dealing 
with the patient is an urgent one, for it avoids the delays 
that nearly always attend fall certification. 

(3) By Summary Reception Order, and (4) By Inquisition . — 
The former is a method available for non-rate-aided patients 
in special ciroumstcmces, t.e., when foimd wandering at large, 
or neglected, or cruelly treated by their relatives. The latter 
method is hardly ever used, except when large and complicated 
financial issues arise. Details should be sought in textbooks 
of medical jurisprudence. 

B. For rate-aided patients (not private) the method is by 
Summary Reception Order. The necessary forms for admission 
comprise an order of a Justice of the Peace, a Statement of 
Particulars, and one Medical Certificate. 

In practice, when a patient cannot afford an institution 
for private patients, the medical attendant should advise the 
relatives to notify the Relieving Officer of the district (his 
address can, if necessary, be obtained from the police). It is 
well to give the relatives a note to the effect that the patient 
is a fit case for removal to the observation ward, with a brief 
outline of the reasons that have led to this conclusion. The 
Relieving Officer will then make the necessary arrangements. 
Such a note is not a certificate. 

The reasons for certifying a patient have been summarised 
as follows : — 

1. To protect the public from injury. 

2. To protect the patient from sdf-injuiy. 

3. To give freatment with a view to cure or amelioration 

which cannot otherwise be given. 

4. To protect the patient from injury resulting from want 

of care. 



THE LEGAL ASPECTS OF MENTAL ILLNESS 1071 

All the ‘ dooTunents connected with certification must be 
filled up with meticulous care, and reasons have to be given 
in the medical certificate not only for the patient being of 
unsotmd mind but also for his being “ a proper person to be 
detained under care and treatment.” Certificates should only 
give plain statements of fact and should be couched in non- 
technical language. The diagnosis is not required and should 
not be given. Facts observed by the examiner must be dis- 
tinguished very clearly from the facts communicated by others. 
The ideal cert^cate is one that would convince the most stupid 
and bigoted member of a jury that the patient was insane. 

“ Persons signing mescal certificates will not be liable 
to any civil or criminal proceeding if they act in good faith 
and with reasonable care.” 

CmocENAii Responsibility 

A person who is found to be insane at the time of trial 
shall not be tried (Criminal Lunatics Act, 1880). When during 
the trial 'of an accused person he is found to have been insane 
at the time of the commission of the act, the jury shall, if 
satisfied that he committed the offence, return a verdict of 
” Guilty but insane.” In either case the person may be 
detained in custody during His Majesty’s pleasure. 

In dealing with insanity, the Courts follow the rules laid 
down by the judges m connection with the case of McNaughton, 
a paranoid patient, who had been tried for the wilful murder 
of Sir Robert Peel’s private secretary. The important points 
in these rules are : — 

1. “In order to establish a defence on the ground of 

insanity, it must be clearly proved that at the time 
of committing the act the party accused was labouring 
under such defect of reason fi»m djsease of the mind 
as not to know the nature and quality of the act he 
was doing, or if he did know it, that he did not 
know he was doing what was wrong.” 

2. “ If the accused labours under ‘ partial delusions ’ only, 

and is in all other respects sane, he should be con- 
sidered in the seune situation as to responsibility as 
if the facts with respect to which the delusion exists 
were real.” 

Modem psychiatry would object to the basic conceptions 
of both these rales. Thus, the idea of partial insanity contra- 
dicts the present view that mental disease is a disorder of the 



1072 


PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE 


total personality, and it is now believed that instinotual and 
emotional factors are much more important in controlling a 
person’s actions than are intellectual processes or rational 
considerations. However, these rules ^ still applied in court. 

Civil Law 

The question of insanity may arise in all provinces of Civil 
Law, but only three points will be mentioned here : — 

1. Management of Property. — K a person is apparently 
unable to mtuiage his property by reason of mental disorder, 
a guardian may be appointed for him, and the Master in 
Lunacy is empowered to exercise jurisdiction over the estate 
of mental patients and, if necessary, to appoint a receiver. 

It is possible under Section 116 of the Lunacy Act, 1890, 
for a doctor, who ought to be the patient’s usual medical 
attendant, to write a certificate to the effect that the patient 
is incapable of managing his affairs “ by reason of mental 
infirmity arising from disease or si^,” and this can be made 
to apply to those who are not certified. This provision is 
extremely useful for senile patients and for certain other 
conditions. 

“ If the patient is lawfully detained the Master is in a 
position, if he thinks it desirable, to make an order without 
requiring any medical evidence.” 

2. Testamentary Capacity. — ^This is not an uncommon 
question in examinations. The medical man should satisfy 
himself on the following essential points : Does the patient 
(1) understand the nature of a Will ; (2) the effect of a WiU ; 
(3) appear to have a reasonable knowledge of his estate and 
has he any delusions thereon ; (4) has he the capacity to 
appreciate what dependents, relatives, or friends might reason- 
ably be entitled to his boimty ; (5) has he any delusions which 
wo^d per se caiise him to omit any person or persons as 
beneficuffies, who otherwise might reasonably have been 
included ; (6) has he any delusion which would cause him to 
make a gift which he might not have made in the absence of 
such delusion ; (7) does he appear to understand the importance 
attached to his act ; (8) if the medical practitioner sees the 
draft of the will, do the bequests appear to him to be reasonable. 

A patient who is certified may possess testamentary 
capacity and one who is not certified may not. 

Divorce. — ^Instuiity can be a reason for divorce and for 
nullification of a marriage. A petition for divorce may be 
presented on the ground that the respondent is incurably 



THE legal aspects OF MENTAL ILLNESS 1073 

of unsound mind and has been continuously under care and 
treatment for a period of at least five years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition {Matrimonial 
Causes Act, 1937). “ Under care and treatment means either 
certified or a voluntary patient, provided the voluntary treat- 
ment follows directly on a period of detention under a certificate. 

NiMification of a marriage may take place if either party 
was at the time of the marriage of unsound mind, or a mental 
defective, or subject to recurrent fits of insanity or epilepsy. 
The condition of such a decree is that the petitioner was at 
the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged. The 
petition has to be filed within a year from the date of marriage. 
With regard to nullification no details about the tjrpe or 
degree of insanity have as yet been laid down ; at any rate, 
certifiable insanity is not the only necessary condition. 

All the necessary forms in connection with the legal aspects 
of mental illness may be obtained fix)m Messrs Shaw & Sons 
Ltd., Fetter Lane, E.C.4, or fix>m the institution to which 
the patient is to be removed. 

The Board of Control, the central authority in England, 
expresses willingness to provide help and information in tackling 
questions referring to certification, but is not able to pronounce 
whether a patient should be certified, though it may question 
the legitimacy of certification subsequently. 

Desmond Curran. 

Erio Guttmann. 


68 



COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


THE ERYTHEMAS 

E rythema or redness of the skin due to vascular 
dilatation is the commonest cutaneous reaction to all 
kinds of stimuli whether external or internal. 

Erythema may be diffuse or disposed in circumscribed spots 
or patches, and it may be generalist or of limited distribution. 
Active erythema is generally bright red in colour and accom- 
panied by more or less tenderness, burning, and itching ; the 
surface temperature is usually raised. The colour of passive 
erythema is dark red, or even violet, and the temperature of 
the skin is lowered. Blanching of erythema is produced by 
pressure. Simple erythema may be complicated by serous 
exudation, cellular infiltration, and hsemprrhage in the skin 
with the formation of elevated lesions of various dimensions 
and colours, sometimes surmounted by buUse or vesicles. 

Claasiflcatio&. — Excluding all due to external causes, the 
important erythemas may Im classified as follows : — 

A. Erythemas of Limited Duration. — 1. The eruptions of 
rubella, typhoid fever, typhus, scarlet fever, and the roseola of 
syphilis ; prevariolar erythema, and the erythemas which may 
accompany puerperal fever and other septaceemias, cholera, and 
cerebrospinal meningitis. All these have been described elsewhere. 

2. Erythematous rashes may follow the administration of 
an enema or of drugs, especially opium, mercury, quinine, 
copaiba, phenolphthalein, the iodide and bromides, anti- 
pyrine, salicylates, digitalis, beUadonna, the sulphonamide 
(^gs, and the barbiturates. A detailed, description of these 
is beyond the scope of this chapter. 

3. Erythema scarlatinoides. 

4. Recurrmt soarlatinifrnrm erythema. 

5. Erythema nodosum (vide p. 78). 

6. Erythema multiforme. 

B. Persi^eni Erythemas. — 1. Annular centrifugal erythema. 
2. Lupus erythematosus. 3. Erythema pernio. 4. Acro- 
cyanosis. 6. Rosacea {vide p. 1081). 

1074 



THE ERYTHEMAS 


1076 


Eiythema ScarlatiiioidM. — The onset is acute and may be 
accompanied by slight to moderate fever, which may last a 
few days. The eruption, bright red in colour, resembles that 
of scarlet fever. The distribution is widespread, hut part of 
the surface may be spared ; the face may or may not be involved; 
Exfoliation commences on the third or fourth day, earlier than 
in scarlet fever and often before the disappearance of the 
erythema. Redness of the mucous membranes of the nose 
and pharynx and exfoliation of the tongue usually accompany 
the eruption. The skin returns to its normal condition in about 
three to four weeks. 

The diagnosis from scarlet fever may be difficult in the 
early stage, but the whole process is of shorter duration. 

The eruption may follow the administration of an enema 
or of certain drugs, notably opium, quinine, and mercTiry. 
It may occur in acute rheumatism, tonsillitis, septicaemia, 
pyaemia, and food poisoning. In many cases, however, no 
definite cause can be established. A recurrent and usually 
more severe form of the condition is known as recurrent scar- 
latiniform erythema. 

Erythema Moltiforme. — ^A variety of eruptions consisting 
of raised er}rthematous lesions of figured outline and of various 
dimensions are included in this group. 

Symptonu . — ^Thore are four main types of lesion, erythemato- 
papular, erythemato-vesioular, bullous, and nodulw. They are 
aooompani^ by pruritus amd burning, and occur generally in 
numbers on the following sites of predilection ; the dorsal 
awpeots of the fingers and hands, the forearms and elbows, the 
face — especially the foreheaid — the feet, ankles, legs, and knees. 
Other parts of the body may adso be attacked. Lesions also 
occur frequently on the buccal mucous membrane, especially 
in recurrent oases, amd are occasionally limited to that 
situation. 

The disease, which runs a course of two to four weeks, 
may begin with slight initial fever, or exceptionally there may 
be moderate fever lasting a week or longer. Ck>nstitutionad 
disturbance is often mild in degree or abwnt, but there may 
be pains in the limbs and gastro-intestmad disturbauioe, some- 
times with vomiting, diarrhoea, atnd passaige of blood in the 
stools : such oases are related to the toxic purprucas. Ehythema 
mtiltiforme occasionally amoompamies amute rheumatism. 

Reouirenoes aure Sommon, but occur chiefly in the benign 
oases of the disease, 

Erf^hmato-papular Type , — ^The lesions are raised Imitioular 
papules or pat^es, exhibiting a central zone which may be 



1076 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

violet in colour, or pale from oedema, or hemorrhagic, sur- 
rounded by a peripheral red zone ; delicdte transitions in tint 
from one zone to another are often seen. 

Erythemato-vesicidar Type . — ^The peripherad zone is sur- 
mount^ by a row of vesicles which may become confluent 
to form a continuous ring. 

BvUous Type . — ^The centre of the lesion is surmounted by 
a bulla ; the peripheral zone may be vesicular. 

Nodular Type . — ^The lesions resemble erythema nodosum, 
but are smaller and usually brighter red in colour. One inter- 
esting variety of this type persists if untreated for many months, 
accompanied by fever throughout, but without severe con- 
stitutional symptoms. That it is due to meningococcal 
septicaemia has been proved by blood cultiire on many occasions. 
It is cured almost instantaneously by the administration of 
sulphapyridine. 

The lesions on the mucous membrane begin as erythematous 
patches or bullae, which quickly become er^ed to form rather 
painful shallow ulcers, often covered by a membrane. 

Erythema multiforme is a disease of multiple aetiology. 
It is an expression of individtml sensitivity to toxins deriv^ 
from various sources. A lesion in the skin itself, such as a 
whitlow, a persistent patch of impetigo, a bum, or pustular 
ringworm infection are occasional focal causes. Some attacks 
follow tonsillitis. The reouirent oases have usually no dis- 
coverable cause. It is possible that there are really two groups : 
(1) those in which the eruption is the expression of allergic 
sensitivity to a demonstrable infection ; the muoous membranes 
are rarely affected and reouirenoes are uncommon ; (2) oases 
which occur in the complete absence of any other disturb- 
ance, and which, like herpes simplex, recur at long or short 
intervals. The muoous membranes are often attacked ; for 
these there may be a specific, though at present unknown, oatise. 

Treatment . — ^In view of the that erythema multiforme 
may be an expression of a serious condition such as acute 
rheumatism, it is advisable to regard all initial attacks as 
potentially serious, and to advise confinement to bed. When 
past attacks have been unaccompanied by constitutional 
dktnrbanoe, this measure may be unnecessary ; but a general 
examination should always be made, particular note being 
taken of any elevation of pulse and temperature. 

The treatment of recurrent cases is disappointing, but in 
general it should be directed towards the eradication of possible 
foci of infection, particular attention being paid to the teeth, 
tonsils, and sinuses. 



THE ERYTHEMAS 


1077 


Fortunately, the condition does not tend to recur throughout 
life, but disappears in the com'se of years. 

The local treatment is of little importance, and consists of 
the alleviation of burning and pruritus by the application of 
soothing liniments or creams ; calamine lotion or liniment 
serve this pmpose. 

Stevens-Johnson Eruptive Fever. — ^An erythemato-buUous 
eruption presenting special and striking features is met with 
occasionally. The onset is acute with fever ; blisters and 
erosions occur first on the mucous membrane of the mouth 
and sometimes of the eyes ; this is followed within a few days 
by a widespread eruption consisting of erythematous spots 
and patches with a tendency to form blisters, particularly 
about the mouth and on the genitals. Fever persists for ten 
to fourteen days, and during this period the patient may 
appear to be dangerously ill. Rapid* recovery follows the faU 
in temperature. The ophthalmia has occasionally led to blind- 
ness. The condition, originally described by Stevens and 
Johnson (1922) under the name of eruptive fever with stomatitis 
and ophthalmia, occurred with considerable frequency in the 
winters of 1940-41 and 1941-42. The course of the illness 
was not influenced by sulphonamide therapy. 

Annular Centriiugal Erythema. — This not uncommon type 
of erythema consists of raised red patches, which enlarge peri- 
pherally by a raised oord-like border and clear in the centre to 
form annular, or by confluence with other lesions polycyclic 
figures. They extend gradually, and in the course of weeks 
may attain a diameter of several inches. The centre is usually 
faintly pigmented. 

The eruption occurs on any part and there may be several 
lesions or only one ; after several weeks or months they ulti- 
mately disappear. Recurrences are sometimes seen, often at 
the sites of previous lesions. 

Lupus Erythematosus — Symptoms . — ^The lesions of this 
important disease consist of slightly infiltrated patches of 
persistent erythema covered with adlmrent scales, ^e patches 
are of oval, round, polycyclic, or irregular outline, and have a 
tendency to clear up in the centre with the production of 
scarring. The scales may be lamellated or fine, or may be 
present only in the mouths of the hair follicles as homy 
plugs. 

The lamellated scales often show on their under-surfaces 
homy prolongations which project into the* follicles. Lesions 
whid^ ]^ve undergone partial healing with atrophy often have 
a depressed centre and a raised border. 



1078 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

TdangieotaBes are generally seen both in the atrophied 
portion and on the actively spreading border. The lesions are 
the seat of mild bumii^ sensation and occasionally of itching, 
and may be tender to touch. There are four types, three of 
them of limited distribution, and usually symmetrical, the 
fourth disseminated ; they are : (1) the fixed type ; (2) a 
wandering symmetrical type. Lupus erythematosus migrans ; 
(3) Hutohinmn’s chilblain lupus ; (4) disseminated Lupus 

ei^hematosus. 

The Fixed Type . — ^The disease occupies especially the 
bridge of the nose and the malar regions, the temples, scalp, 
esus, and the backs of the hands and fingers, especially the 
terminal phalanges. There are rarely lesions on the buccal 
mucous membrane, usually continuous over the lip. One 
or several patches may be present. The lesions are ii^trated, 
scaly, and extremely persistent, healing with marked atrophy 
and adhesion of the soar to such underlying tissues as the 
cartilages of the nose and ear. Lapus erythemcUoaua migrans 
begins with bright red oong^tive patches, most often on the 
cheeks ; they extend with some rapidity forming eventually 
by confluence with others more or less extensive areas. They 
tend also to clear up in the centre, sometimes with just detect- 
able atrophy, sometimes without, while the peripheral portion 
remains r^, turgid, and usually covered with fine scales. These 
cases, more unstable than the fixed type of the disease, are 
also more widespread as a rule. It is common to find lesions 
on the neck and the chest, as well as on the hands and forearms. 
They link fixed Lupus erythematosus with the disseminated 
cases, and they are sometimes classified as subacute. 

Huichinson’s ChiUtlain Lupus . — ^The condition described 
by Jonathan Hutchinson as chilblain lupus is lupus erythema- 
tosus, confined to the hands. The lesions resemble c^blains 
to begin with, but become depressed in their centres and scaly, 
and ^timately heal with atrophy. They occur chiefly on both 
palmar and dorsal aspects of the fingers, but often on other 
parts of the hands as well. Atrophy with telangiectases can 
almost always be seen on the dors^ aspect of the terminal 
phalanges. The condition often clears up in summer, though 
scars remain. 

IXseeminated Lupus Erythematosus . — ^This may occur either 
as an extension of one of the preceding types, or it may be 
acute and disseminated from the begirming. It is rare. 

The onset is acute with fever and often with severe constitu- 
tional disturbance. Tim omption is in the form of widespread 
patdme and sheets, red or rkdaoeous in colour, and findy scaly ; 



THE ERYTHEMAS 1079 

scattered bullous lesions may rarely be present. The distribu- 
tion is more or less universal. These cases may he fatal in the 
course of several months, or they may regress. Relapse after 
remission, even of long duration, is, however, the rule rather 
than the exception. In fatal cases, death is due to broncho- 
pneumonia, pericarditis, pleurisy, septic arthritis, and other types 
of septic infed)ion ; occasionally to generalised tuberculosis. 

Etiology . — ^Lupus erythematosus is very rare in children 
and somewhat less rare in old age ; it oeeurs chiefly between 
twenty and fifty years of age. The sites of predilection are 
those in which the peripheral circulation is most stagnant, 
the nose, cheeks, ears and fingers. The influence of cold is 
demonstrably important, also that of sunlight. We do not 
know how these physical stimuli provoke the changes char- 
acteristic of Lupus erythematosus, but evidently they alone 
cannot be responsible. 

It has long been believed to be related to tuberculosis ; 
the existence, however, of tuberculosis elsewhere can rarely be 
demonstrated, and histologically the disease bears not the least 
resemblance to tuberculosis. However, the co-existence of the 
two conditions is occasionally met with in the chronic types, 
and as already stated, a few of the acute cases terminate with 
generalised tuberculosis. It seems, therefore, probable that 
in some at least tuberculosis plays a part. 

It is possible also that other infections may be concerned 
in the process, and it has been suggested that because many 
fatal disseminated cases terminate with some streptococcal 
complication, that some of the chronic cases may be due to 
latent or focal streptococcal infection. 

TretUment . — Lupus erythematosus is extremely chronic and 
intractable ; while there is a tendency towards more or less 
spontaneous resolution, particularly of the superficial variety 
of the disease, attempts to influence it by treatment have in 
the main proved disappointing. Practical meMures consisted 
in the past of local applications, such as carbon dioxide snow 
or a mixture of phenol and lactic acid. In more recent years 
some progress in the treatment of the disease has been attained 
by the use of gold compounds and bismuth. Grold preparations 
are of particular value in the fixed type, but they are not safe 
in the more Tinstable types, whether locsdised or disseminated. 
They are administered by weekly injection, a total of about 
one gramme being given in ten to twelve weekly doses. After 
an interval of two months or longer a further course may be 
necessary. The value of this treatment is' variable, but ^ere 
is sometimes striking improvement and even complete cure. 



1080 COMMON DISEASES OP THE SKIN 

The dosage usually given is considerably smaller than that 
employed in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis, but in 
spite of this toxic reactions are fairly frequent. An early 
morbilliform erythema is without immediate serious significance, 
though it may indicate intolerance to the drug and may, if the 
admkustration of gold is continued, be followed by exfoliative 
dermatitis. The latter condition may, however, occur without 
early e^bition of intolerance. 

The emplo 3 ^ent of bismuth by injection in the treatment 
of lupus erythematosus is quite ^m danger, but is less 
effective than gold therapy. 

Sulphanilamide in small doses, 0*5 gramme three times 
daily, is sometimes of considerable value in the more superficial 
localised cases and in the wandering type. Localised sepsis, 
e.g. in the mouth, sinuses or tonsils, should receive attention. 

Erysipeloid ol Rosenbach. — ^This is a circumscribed erythema 
of infective origin. It occurs most often on the fingers and hands 
and bears a superficial resemblance to erysipelas, but as met 
with in this country there is little or no fever or constitutional 
disturbance, and only moderate tenderness. A dusky, almost 
cyanotic hue, is characteristic. Erysipeloid occurs in butchers 
and others, including housewives whose work involves handling 
meat. It has become far more common in England during the 
war than formerly. The causal organism is the Bacillus ery- 
sipdatus suis and is carried as a saprophyte on a variety of 
animals and fish ; . the infection gains entrance through any 
small breach in the skin, and often follows a prick by a bone. 
It clears up spontaneously in from three to seven weeks. A 
mild, temporary arthritis of one or more joints in the zone of 
the erythema is an occasional complication. 

Erythema Pernio (Chilblain).— bhilblams are erythematous 
swellings which occur in cold weathw in individuals who 
suffer frxnn circulatory h 3 irpoetasis. Children and adolescents 
are chiefly attacked. The lesions appear first as erythematous 
patches, but owing to serous exudation and cellular infiltration 
quickly become transformed into tumefaoient swellings. The 
dorsal aspects of the fingers and toes, the ulnar margins of the 
himds, t^ lateral margin of the feet, the heels, the ears, and 
nose are chiefly affected. They are accompanied by tenderness, 
burning and itdiing, and ate sometimes the seat of superficial 
vesides or buUss. The surface is frequently broken by firiction, 
with the production of painful superficial ^cers. 

TreatmetU . — ^The development of chilblains may be pre- 
vmited to some extent by wearing thick boots, warm stookh^^ 
and g^es, and m^iecially by active exercise. Calcium by ^ 



THE ERYTHEMAS 


1081 


mouth is a popular remedy, but there is no demonstrable 
disturbance of calcium metabolism and the treatment is prob- 
ably of no material value. Locally stimulating applications 
may be used. (For examples, vide Therapeutic Section.) 

Aorooyanosis. — ^As the name implies, this condition consists 
of a cyanotic congestive erythema of the extremities. The 
hands, the lower third of the legs, and the feet are especially 
affected. In severe oases the han^ are cold, blue, and moist. 
On digital pressure the erythema may be made to blanch for 
as long as half a minute, demonstrating the extreme degree of 
circulatory hypostasis. The condition is most often seen in 
adolescent and young adult girls, who are nearly always 
somewhat obese and exhibit on their lower extremities papular 
follicular lesions resembling those of keratosis pilaris, which, 
owing to congestive vasctdar changes, become reddened and 
especially prominent in cold weather ; this change is often 
spoken of as follicular pemiosis. 

Diffuse blue swellings often appear on the lower thirds of 
the legs in winter, particularly on the outer aspect. They 
may be somewhat painful, and occasionally become (super- 
ficially) ulcerated or the site of buUse. They are not infrequently 
mistaken for hypodermic tuberculides (Bazin’s Erythema 
Induratum). The frequency of this condition in recent years 
is attribute in part to the almost universal habit of wearing 
silk stockings. 

The condition disappears partly or completely in summer, 
but reciuB each winter for several years ; eventually the 
cyanotic erythema and swellings diminish to be replaced by a 
podgy thickening of the extremities which is often observed in 
mid^e-aged women. 

The swellings on the legs may be made to disappear by 
rest in bed, apart from which, treatment consists in the 
wearing of warm stockings and boots and the application of 
stimulating external applications. Calcium therapy has proved 
of no value. Belief in severe cases has followed lumbar 
sympathectomy. 

Boiaoea and Acne Rosacea. — ^This condition, which consists 
essentially of congestive erythema over the forehead, nose, 
cheeks, and chin, with occasional extension to the neck and 
ears, is primarily dependent upon changes in the vessels of* 
the skin. These consist of a persistent dilatation of the capil- 
i^ies and venules which often leads eventually to the formation 
of telangiectases. Some degree of constitutional .vaso-motor 
instability is commonly present. Rosacea may •occur inde- 
pendently of seborrhoea, but when this is present the vascular 



1082 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


alterations are frequently complicated by aoneform pustules, 
and it is for these secondary lesions that patients most often 
seek advice. Digestive troubles are sometimes present and 
may accentuate the vascular changes in the skin ; chronic 
gastritis vuth flatulence and the sensation of fullness tdter 
meals are fairly common, and in such cases a meal, a hot drink, 
or alcohol will provoke reflex flushing of the rosaceous areas. 
The fractional test meal has shown in a small proportion of 
oases an absent or low free hydrochloric acid content. Rosacea 
is not uncommon in subjects in whom digestive trouble is 
entirely lacking. Exposure to hard weather conditions may 
be the sole apparent cause. No doubt alcohol is a factor in 
certain rosaoeas but its importance has been exaggerated. 

Symptoms. — ^In the early stage rosacea consists of attacks 
of congestion. By degrees this becomes permanent and dilated 
venules develop, particularly on the cheeks and nose. In sebor- 
rhoeic subjects acneform pustulation and hyjwrtrophy of the 
sebaceous glands take place, and in extreme degrees may lead to 
severe disfigurement. The nose in particular may be enormously 
hypertrophied (rhinophyma). A small percentage of cases are 
complicated by comeal ulceration ; this is preced^ by extension 
of the rosaceous congestion of the cheeks to the conjimctiva 
lining the lower eyelids. Acne keratitis, as it is called, is 
sometimes found in purely vascular rosaceas, that is, without 
seborrhoea or acne. 

Treatment. — This must be directed primarily to the under- 
lying cause. Septic teeth must be removed and stimulants 
prohibited. Meals should be simple in qiulity and small in 
quantity. In those oases which .depend upon chronic gastritis, 
dilute hydrochloric acid taken with, or immediately after, 
meals is often very valuable. Pustular cases often respond 
satisfactorily to ointments and pastes containing sulphur. 
The dilated venules and capillaries may be destroyed by 
ignipuncture or electro-coagulation. Carbon dioxide snow 
evei^y applied for five seconds over the reddened areas will 
sametimes diminish the persistent erythema. Rhinophyma’ is 
best treated by plastic operation. 


PYOGENIC INFECTIONS OF THE SKIN 

The Hwmal Baetsthdofy of ths Sldii.— Two mioro- 
otganisms have a predileoti<m for the sebaceous foUides : the 
sta^diyloooooiis and tile a<me badllos. The latter is found in 
adolesoents uid adults in the sebaceous and henmy material 



PYOGENIC INFECTIONS OP THE SKIN 1083 

which can be expressed from the follicles in seborrhoeio 
subjects. Staphylococci are found in single elements in a large 
proportion of all follicles, while the sweat ducts are generally 
ste^e. In addition to these bacteria, yeast-like organisms are 
found normally in the skin, especially the pityrosporon, which 
occurs in the scales of pityriasis capitis, and of seborrhoeio 
dermatitis. Streptococci are not foupd on healthy skin, though 
they readily become implanted on damaged skin. 

Staphylococcal Infections 

Isolated staphylococci in the mouths of the foUicles are 
harmless ; when, however, conditions arise which allow them 
to multiply, they give rise to a reaction in the form of a 
follicular pustule. This is the primary lesion of the following 
staphylococcal eruptions : (1) simple staphylococcal folliculitis 
or Bockhardt’s impetigo ; (2) furunculosis ; (3) carbuncle ; 
(4) hidradenitis ; (5) sycosis. 

Bockhardt’s Impetigo. — ^The elemental lesion consists of 
an intra-epidermal pustule, almost invariably situated at the 
mouth of a hair folhole. Its mode of formation is as follows : 
growth of the organism determines a flow of serum and leuco- 
cytes to the colony of microbes situated in the superficial 
layers of the epidermis. The leucocytes obtain access to the 
point of multipUcation without obvious damage to the deeper 
layers of the epidermis, but dislocate the more superficial 
layers and form a little biconvex intra-epidermal pustule. 
The reaction results ordinarily in the death of the organism, 
the pustule slowly dries up into a crust, and is finally cast 
off the surface by regeneration of the epithelium beneath 
the crust. 

Bockhardt’s impetigo occurs commonly on the scalp in 
children, generally following an attack of impetigo contagiosa, 
or it may complicate other conditions such as eczema of the 
scalp or pediculosis. It is often accompanied by painful sub- 
occipital adenitis. The eruption eonsists of hundreds of 
yellow pustules, small or large, each centred by an emerging 
hair.* It occurs also on other paurts. 

Vuianeiiloiii. — ^The growth of staphylococci is not necessarily 
confined to the most superficial part of tiie foUicle, but may 
penetrate to varying depths. When multiplication takes 
place in the deeper portion of the follicle, one of two reactions 
may take place : the frnrmation of a perifollicular abscess 
(furoncular absoeas) or sudden massive necrosis of the tissues 
surrounding the follicle (a furuncle). In eitiier case the deeper 



1084 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


infection is almost always preceded by a small superficial 
pustule which may have disappeared spontaneously before the 
more important lesion has attained its full development. In 
the case of an ordinary boil, the staphylococcal colony remains 
confined to the centre of the process, and the death of sur- 
rounding tissue is determined by toxins acting at a distance. 
By degrees the necrosed mass is either separated from the 
normal tissue by the advent of leucocytes and detached as a 
core or as a slough, or it may be converted into an abscess, 
or sometimes absorbed without breaking down. Of the con- 
stitutional factors that predispose to fmnmculosis very little 
is known. Many intractable cases appear otherwise to be in 
good health. Diabetes is, however, a well-known predisposing 
cause. Occasionally furunculosis is accompanied by a glyco- 
suria which disappears with the cure of the infection. In 
the majority of cases there is no demonstrable disturbance of 
sugar metabolism. 

Pimmculosis fiequently relapses over long periods, especially 
in certain places, notably the nape of the neck and the large 
folds. Seborrhoea and hyperhidrosis are predisposing factors. 

Carbuncle. — ^The aetiology is similar to that of a boil, but the 
lesions are mote extensive. The necrosis of the perifollicular 
tissue may spread in the subcutaneous tissue to involve several 
follicles, or a carbtmcle may be caused by the simultaneous 
infection of a number of follicles, the perifollicular necrosis 
forming a confluent mass in .the skin and subcutaneous tissue. 
Carbuncles are detached by peripheral suppuration and 
generally end by separating as a slough. 

Hidi^enitis. — ^Ibe lesions are intradermal or subcutaneous 
abscesses foimd practically only in the axillm and occasionally 
about the anus. They may complicate seborThoeio dermatitis 
of the axillae and hyperhidrosis, and are formed about the 
sweat glands. They tegin as one or more painful dermal or 
subcutaneous indurations, which may be absorbed or may 
become soft and finally discharge creamy pus through a thin 
red epidermis ; they are never detached as a core as in 
furunculosis. They are very prone to recur, especially in 
hot weather. 

An attack of fiiranculosu appears to lower what might be 
called natural resistance to staphylococcal infection, and 
attempts to raise it by artificial means have not proved very 
successful. Treatment by vaccines has to some extent been 
replaced by graduated injection of staphylococcal toxoid, or a 
mixture of toxoid and vaccine (vaccoid), by means of which it is 
possible to raise to a renuukable degree the caparity of the bloed 



PYOGENIC INFECTIONS OF THE SKIN 1086 

to inhibit the lysis of rabbit’s blood cells by staphylococcal 
toxin. 

Among other general remedies must be mentioned sulpha- 
thiazole and sulphapyridine. The striking results of the 
treatment of severe staphylococcal infections by the bacterio- 
static penicillin, discovered by Fleming, point to a future 
remedy of great value. 

Local Treatment. — In the stage of the early oircumfollicular 
pustule boils may sometimes be aborted by opening and 
appl 3 nng pure carbolic acid or by the galvano-cautery, using 
a fine point, but later than this surgical interference is harmful. 
Hot AUbour water dressings (vide p. 1135) or mercury perchloride 
dressings, the application of pure ichthyol, or magnesium 
sulphate mixed with glycerine to make a paste, are all satis- 
factory forms of local treatment. Similar treatment is suitable 
for hidradenitis, though the softened abscesses often require 
opening. Occasionally carbuncles require surgical interference. 
To prevent recurrences Sabouraud recommends attempting to 
sterilise the whole skin by adding zinc sulphate to the daily 
bath in the strength of 1 in 4,000. Mercury and potassium 
iodide 4 gnu. to the bath may also be employed. 

Sycosis. — In this condition the lesions are follicular pustules 
of the same anatomical form, for the most part, as the pustule 
of Bockhardt’s impetigo, though a certain proportion of the 
follicles are infected more deeply. The infecting organism is 
always Staphylococcus aureus. There are six clinical varieties : — 

1. Sycosis of the upper lip, which is often secondary to 
chronic rhinitis and is generally accompanied by chronic 
blepharitis and often conjunctivitis. 

2. Sycosis of the scalp, found generally in children as a 
complication of a chronic impetigo or eczema. This type is 
also generally accompanied by sycosis of the eyebrows and 
eyelashes. 

3. Sycosis of the face or chin, often called barbers’ rash ; 
this often follows impetigo of the beard. 

4. Sycosis nuolue is a fourth variety. The nape of the 
neck is especially liable both to furunculosis and chronic 
staphyloooc^ folliculitis. The latter occurs chiefly in obese 
subjects with thick necks. Friction of the collar appears to 
determine the site of the infection in some oases, but in others 
the folliculitis is above the part which is rubbed in this way ; 
in these intertrigenous friction of the redundant skin may be 
the determining factor. Occasionally the chronic follicular 
infection is accompanied by fibrous proliferation, the pustrdes 
being converted by this process into small hard nodules, or 



1086 COUMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

when confluent into a horizontal irregular fibrous band. When 
this occxuB the condition is spoken of as dermatitis papillaris 
capilliti (Kaposi). The same fibrotic change may accompany 
pustular acne of the nape of the neck. 

5. Lupoid sycosis. In this type the follicles are deeply 
infected and ultimately destroyed. CSentral cicatricial alopecia 
is accompanied by a very gi^ual centrifugal spread of the 
infection. The condition is generally found as a single plaque 
on one cheek, or as a more or less widespread area in the scalp. 

6. Generalised sycosis ; the scalp, eyebrows, eyelashes, 
beard, axillary, and pubic hair follicles are all affected. These 
cases are often late sequelae of chronic eczema of the infective 
type or sycosis of the scalp in childhood. 

Symptoms of Sycosis . — ^The lesions consist either of more or 
less closely aggregated follicular pustules, situated on a diffusely 
red background, or tuberous lesions in the positions already 
described, or of diffuse red areas, often crusted in parts, in 
which isolated follicular pustules may not be seen. They are 
often associated with fissures at the nasolabial jimction and the 
labial commissures ; they differ from simple folliculitis by 
behaviour rather than by their appearance in being essentially 
chronic or constantly recurrent. A certain number of the 
follicles are deeply i^ected. Some casqs of sycosis end after 
twenty years or more by cicatricial alopecia of the affected part. 

Course and Prognosis . — Sycosis shows little tendency to 
spontaneous cure, but varies greatly in its response to treat- 
ment : the earlier and more localised the case, the greater the 
probability of complete cure. If the condition has been 
established for a year or longer, the prognosis is uncertain. 
Among the more unsatisfactory are the cases which have 
begun in childhood as an infection of the scalp and eyelashes ; 
in these the beard is often attacked in adult life. Ciliary 
sycosis alone, especially if accompanied by chronic nasal catarrh, 
may also be complicated in adults by intractable sycosis of the 
upper hp, imd sometimes of the bea^ generally. 

The most refractory form of all is that in which all hairy 
parts ate attacked. In many of these the infection in the 
scalp, or blepharitis, has been present from childhood. 

Treaimenl . — ^No genm»l treatment can be applied to all 
oases of i^cosu, but any defect in the general state of the 
patient must recrive attention. In early oases with debility 
from such oauaes as malnutrition, overwork, or alcoholism, a 
long holiday in tibe open air may be of great vdiue. Vaccines 
have been employed many years but have not {Hxtved reliable. 
Stajfiiyloooooal toxoid has aim fikiled as a remedy for syoosia. 



PYOGENIC INFECTIONS OP THE SKIN 1087 

The local treatment is all-important. It is first necessary 
to stop shaving, keeping the hair cut as short as possible 
with scissors. Crusts must be removed by starch and 
boric poultices or antiseptic compresses. Alibour water is 
a suitable preparation for this purpose diluted with 5 to 10 
parts of water. 

When the crusts have been removed the improvement is 
often striking but progresses no further. In early cases it is 
sometimes possible to complete the cure by the application 
of one of several preparations, of which the most valuable is 
Compound Quinolor Ointment (Squibb). This is probably the 
most successful of all local remedies used so far against super- 
ficial staphylococcal infections. In the event of intolerance to 
this preparation, a 6 per cent, solution of sodium sulphacetamide 
in water may be used. 

In well-established cases it is necessary to epilate the 
infected areas by X-ray. In the majority this proceeding is 
followed by complete relief from symptoms, but in some a 
close observation of the affected parts reveals bluish or 
faint red patches which indicate that the infection persists 
below the surface. It is impossible to forecast the result 
of a single epilation in sycosis ; in some complete and 
permanent cure follows, but in others regrowth of the 
hair is followed either immediately or after a short period 
of freedom, by relapse. 

Sabouraud recommended after the first epilation the 
continued removal of the hair, including down, by forceps. 

Sycosis of the Eyelashes . — The eyelids are red and thickened ; 
the lashes are often spontaneously shed, but this does not lead to 
cure as in sycosis elsewhere. Conjunctivitis is a common com- 
plication. Ciliary Sycosis frequently complicates impetigenous 
eczema of the scalp, and is often found in association with sycosis 
of the upper lip and with chronic rhinitis following measles. 

Pemphigus Heonstomm. — ^This condition, occurring in the 
first few weeks of life, is not uncommon. The source of infection 
may be a septic umbilical cord, or the infection may be carried 
by a midwife firom one infant to another. The conation begins 
as a vesicle which rapidly becomes a large bulla ; this is quickly 
broken, but the lesion continues to spre^ peripherally, splitting 
up the homy layer. . The lesions may be comparatively smsJl, 
but frequenUy large irregular red areas are foimd, often quite 
dry and bounded always by a white collar of detached homy 
la3rer. The contents of the vesicles rarely become piuulent. 
Fatal oases have occurred, though the great majority are mild 
and easily cured. 



1088 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

Pemphigus neonatorum is generally thought to be the 
counterpart of impetigo contagiosa in adults ; the causal 
organism is the Staphylococcus aureus. 

Mixed Infecjtions 

While staphylococci have long been recognised as the cause 
of the foregoing eruptions, it was generally thought until 
recently that streptococci were responsible for impetigo 
contagiosa, ecthyma and fissured impetigo. The primary 
blister of impetigo contagiosa, except in impetigo neonatorum, 
has been regarded as particularly characteristic of superficial 
streptococcal infection of the skin. Recent work, however 
(J. W. Biggor and G. H. Hodgson, and H. L. Sherwin and 
Ferguson Girdwood), appears to have upset this view ; both 
sets of observations showed that in the earliest stage of the 
infection, that of the primary blister, only ecthyma coagulase 
positive staphylococci can be found, while pyogenic strepto- 
cocci appear later and with increasing frequency the longer 
the infection has gone on, appearing thus to be secondary 
invaders. Inoculation experiments with living cultures of 
staphylococci grown firom cases of impetigo contagiosa were 
also successful, while streptococcal cultures from the same 
source failed to reproduce the lesions characteristic of impetigo. 
These observations suggest that streptococci may be responsible 
for the more persistent types of impetigo or lesions frequently 
associated with or complicating it, ulcers, fissiu-es, and perhaps 
the scaly lesions known as impetigo pityrodis. 

Impetigo Contagiosa. — ^The earliest lesion is an intra- 
epidermal vesicle filled with sero-fibrinous exudate. This quickly 
coagulates, ruptures, and forms a yellow crust; at the same 
time the exudation continues at the circumference of the lesion, 
splitting up the homy layer. In this way the lesion enlarges 
and in so doing rapidly becomes covered by a fr^h crust. 

Sometimes quite large bulks are formed before the lesion 
is broken, particularly upon surface where the homy layer 
is thick, such as the palmar surfaces of the hands and fingers. 

Impetigo contagiosa is more common in children tl^ in 
adults ; it is caus^ by contagion, when the face, neck and 
scalp are most often attacked, or it may complicate other 
conations, such as papular urticaria, eczema, and particularly 
the common pMasitio infections, scabies and pediculiwis 
capitis. 

Fttjniaiic Vorm (PUffrianfortn Impetigo ). — When im])etigo 
has been cured iiregular scaly patches, faintly pink in colour, 



PYOGENIC INFECTIONS OP THE SKIN 1086 

are often left behind and remain for a variable period on 
the site of the original lesions. The same scaly lesions may 
occur spontaneously in children and occasionally in adults, 
usually in the immediate neighbourhood of the nose or mouth, 
and in relation to nasal discharge or oral sepsis. Fissures at 
the labial commissures and at the nasolabial junction are 
often seen in such cases. 

Ecthyma. — ^This is met with most often in children and 
may begin as the ordinary type of impetigo, but under the 
influence of decreased general or local resistance the skin is 
more deeply attacked and superficial epidermic infection 
becomes dermic ulceration. 

The lesions are roimd conical ulcers with a tender red margin. 
They generally become covered by a thick crust, often rupial 
in appearance, beneath which pus accumulates. They are 
found usually on the lower limbs, but are auto-inoculable, and 
as a rule the fresh lesions, wherever formed, are also ulcerative. 
Occasionally they give rise to lymphangitis. 

Fissured Impetigo. — Fissures occur in the course of ordinary 
impetigo, in the post-auricular sulci, the labial commissures, 
at the nasolabial junction, the webs of the toes, and in any 
other natural fold of the skin. They occur in these positions 
also in relation to other conditions, such as chronic rhinitis, 
septic tonsils, carious teeth, eczema of the scalp extending to 
the neck and ears, chronic eczema of the interdigital spaces, 
and eczematoid ringworm of these spaces. Fissures in the 
nares and less often on the under surface of the toes are some- 
time complicated by a cellulitis of the neighbouring areas, 
somewhat resembling erysipelas, though with little constitu- 
tional disturbance. The attacks last about a week, recurring 
at intervals imtil the site of the infection has been cured. 
Recurrence over a long period may lead to blockage of lym- 
phatics and permanent (edema of the eyelids and adjoining 
parts of the face and forehead. 

Oeneral Treatment. — ^Impetigo contagiosa usually demands 
no special general treatment. In cases that resist local treat- 
ment a short course of sulphathiazole, 1 grm. four times 
daily for four or five days, is often an effective remedy. An 
opm-air life, sunlight, and good food are of value in the more 
ohronio types of i^ection. Ultra-violet light therapy applied 
to the general surface and locally has also proved of some value. 
Heliotherapy is the ideal treatment for chronic cases who 
pigment normally. 

liooal IfeMiires. — Impetigo Contagiosa , — ^The essential part 
of treatment is to keep the lesions clean. Various lotions are 

69 



1090 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

used for the purpose of removing the crusts ; this should be 
done twice daily, and not forcibly. Hydrogen peroxide 3 to 6 
vols., Alibour water {vide p. 1136), or J per cent, lysol are 
generally satisfactory though occasionally irritating. A 5 per 
cent, solution of sodium sulphaoetamide has usually proved 
very eflSoient, and if used, no other remedy is required. Other 
sulphonamide drugs, especially sulphathiazole, incorporated 
in various types of base have been used, and generally with 
success. Allergic sensitivity to these is, however, by no means 
unknown, whether they are applied locally or taken by mouth. 
They have provoked an acute light-sensitiveness, a severe 
bullous eruption, particularly on the exposed parts, or a wide- 
spread dermatitis. Among other remedies suitable for applica- 
tion after removal of scabs should be mentioned ^ to 1 per cent, 
solution of silver nitrate, or J to 1 per cent, solution of gentian 
violet in calamine lotion. 

Fissures . — A 1 or 2 per cent, solution of silver nitrate in 
spirit of nitrous ether is a proven remedy. The fissures are 
painted once a day. 

Ecthyma . — The treatment is the same as for impetigo, but 
it may be desirable to use hot diluted Alibour water or mercury 
perchloride in 1 per cent, saline as a fomentation for about 
an hour twice daily, the lesions being covered in the intervening 
period with acriflavine in paraffin 1 in 1,000, a weak mercurial 
ointment or paste, or sulphanilamide powder. Rest in bed is 
sometimes necessary. 

Pemphigus Neonatorum . — ^Potassium permanganate baths 
(1 in 10,000), followed by gentian violet J to 1 per cent, in 
calamine lotion, is usually a satisfactory treatment. 


SEBORRHCEA AND ITS COMPLICATIONS 

The term seborrhoea means excessive sebaceous secretion 
It exists in two forms : — 

1. Seborrhoea oleosa, in which the sebum is usually mixed 
with sweat mid gives to the skin an oily, shiny appearance. 

2. Cystic sebotrhoea, in which t^ sebum, mixed with 
epithelial detritus, fills up the upper third of the hair foUiole 
in the form of a greasy plug, which can be exfuessed from the 
foUide as a filament. 

Sebonhoea, howevmr, is not in itself a disease but a mani- 
festation of a common underlying state of the skin, which has 
been named “ kerosis ” by Darier. Darier defines tiiiB state as 
consisting of (1) a dirty-gn^ discoloration of tiie skin ; (2) a 



SEBORRHOEA AND ITS COMPLICATIONS 1091 

patulous condition of the follicular orifices ; (3) elevation of 
the follicular collar ; (4) slight general thickening of the 

integument. The condition is present chiefiy close to- the 
median line, and is found especially on the nose and cheeks 
forehead, scalp, nape of the neck, prestemal and interscapular 
regions, and sometimes on the pub^ and sacrum. It is usually 
associated with more or less hyperhidrosis. 

Seborrhoea may become manifest in infancy, either in the 
form of slight oihness affecting the face chiefly, or very rarely 
as comedo acne (grouped comedones of infancy). 

After a quiescent interval, during which sebacious activity 
diminishes, the secretion becomes abimdant during puberty. 
This may result in acne vulgaris, and at a slightly later period 
in pityriasis capitis and seborrhoeic dermatitis. Later again 
acne rosacea and rhinophyma may be met with in the subjects 
of kerosis. 

Facial kerosis and seborrhoea may occur in marked degree 
in young subjects after encephalitis lethargica ; in such cases 
it is generally associated with Parkinsonian rigidity and 
excessive salivation. 


Acne 

The primary lesion of acne is the comedo. This consists 
of a plug composed of sebum mixed with homy and epithelial 
detritus which fills the upper third of the follicular canal, 
the mouth of which is blocked by a black homy cap. Some 
of the lesions, however, exist in the form of retention cysts, 
large or small. They are found on the forehead, the nose, 
nasogenial furrows, the cheeks, chin, neck, ears, back, shoulders, 
and chest, rarely on the sacmm, buttocks, and extensor aspects 
of the thighs. In addition to sebum and epithelial debris, the 
seborrhoeic plug contains myriads of very small bacilli known 
as acne bacilli. (Comedones frequently become pustular owing 
presumably to infection of retained sebaceous material. 
Staphylococcus albus is grown fix>m these pustules, and 
aocortBng to Sabouraud, the acne badllus may also develop 
pjrogenio activity. There are several clinic^ varieties of 
acne. 

1. Seborrhosic plugging of the follicles writh few actual 
comedones but with mark^ kerosis, a condition which renders 
the face unsightly by reason of the greasiness and coarseness 
of the skin. 

2. Comedo acne, with large numbers of comedones. 

3. Comedo acne, with pustules. 

4 . Qystk) aone. There are comedones and pustules, but 



1092 COMMON DISEASES OP THE SKIN 

particularly a lai^ number of cysts, some of considerable 
size, occupying the cheeks, the neck, shoulders, chest, and 
bac^ These patients are often somewhat obese and physi- 
cally soft. 

5. Acne oonglobata. This type is somewhat similar to the 
above in that the lesions are cystic to begin with, becoming 
eventually soft abscesses which break down and become covered 
with rupia-like crusts ; by confluence and scarring, labyrinths 
connect^ by fistulous tracts and fibrous bridges are formed. 
The shoulders and trunk are chiefly attacked. This t 3 ^ is 
met with chiefly in middle life. 

6. Acne indurata. This name has been given to a variety 
of acne, the lesions of which consist of somewhat solid papular 
and nodular elevations which appear to arise beneath the skin 
and which slowly approach the surface, become red or blue, and 
sometimes eventually soften and discharge a cheesy material. 
The lesions are often almost entirely confined to the chin 
and may be unaccompanied by comedones. This variety u 
found almost exclusively in women. It is usually at its worst 
immediately before and during the period. 

7. Oil acne. Contact with various oils and greases may 
provoke acne, not only on the face but on parts not normally 
subject to the condition. Since the beginning of the war, the 
number of these cases has increased enormously, particularly 
among the operators, male or female, of small capstan lathes. 
They wear protective rubber aprons, but it is not possible to 
protect the hands and lower part of the 1^, which become the 
seats of innumerable tiny blackheads and acne pustules. Acne, 
if already present on the face, is aggravated. Oil acne disappears 
slowly after cessation of contact with oil. 

8. Chlorine acne. Halogens provoke, in susceptible subjects, 
an acneiform eruption in the places normally subject to acne, 
when taken by the mouth (bromides and iodides) ; and it is 
supposed that they do this by reason of their excretion, in part 
through the sebaceous glands. It seems that these glands may 
also have an aflinity for halogens, for an intense degree of acne 
occurs ftequently in occupations involving external contact 
with chlorine. 

Treatment of Aene. — ^The common comedo acne of puberty 
and adolescence has a tendency to disappear spontaneously, 
though the most severe degrees of it may persist. It is not 
usually associated with any defect in general health, and the 
only gmieral trmtment of any value consists in maintaining the 
high^ possible degree of physical fitness. Local treatment 
consists of firequent washing with soap and water, erqnession of 



ECZEMA 


1093 


comedones with a comedo expressor, and the application of an 
exfoliating lotion or paste containing sulphur. As an alternative 
to exfoliating preparations, ultra-violet light may be used. 
Small repeated applications of superficial X-ray, which has a 
selective depressant action on sebaceous cells, are more effective 
than any other agent, but should only he applied in urgent 
cases, and with extreme care. 

For the other varieties of acne, treatment is less satisfactory. 
Pustules may be opened with a tenotomy knife and emptied, 
the cysts may be emptied by curetting, their cavities being 
afterwards touched with piire carbolic acid, or silver nitrate. 
For these severe acnes also, the application of a strong exfoliating 
paste for two or three nights in succession is usefW. This is 
repeated at intervals of about a week. 

The nodular acne of women is intractable. There is more 
often than not some defect in general health ; the patients 
are often constipated and easily tired ; or their mode of life 
is not healthy. Vaso-motor instability is a factor in some of 
them. At the same time quite a number of them appear to 
be in good physical condition. 

All kinds of hormone therapy, including gonadotropic and 
oestrogenic preparations, anterior pituitary extracts, androgen 
and progestin, have been tried in this and other ■varieties of 
acne, but according to the majority of reports, with little 
success. 

Staphylococcal toxoid or vaccoid have proved valuable 
occasionally. 

Seborrhoeic eczema is described with the erythemato- 
squamous dermatoses (vide p. 1003). 


ECZEMA 

The term eczema is applied not to a single disease of constant 
aetiology but to a series of inflammatory reactions which succeed 
one another in stages, and which are caused by widely 
different pathogenic agents of exfiemal or internal origin, 
dinioally, eczema may be found associated with one or 
several of the following : erythema, vesiculation, weeping, 
crusting, desquamation, liohenification. Histologically the 
changes are constant in type though not in degree. In the 
epidermis they are intercellular oedema with splitting apart 
of the Malpighian cells, spongiosis ; multiplication of the 
Malpighian cells, leading to increase in depth of the epidermis, 
purtioolaiiy in the interpapillary portions, acanthosis, and 



1094 CJOMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

failure of the Malpighian cells to keratimse in the normal way 
80 that the supei^oial cells retain their nuclei, parakeratosis. 
These imperfectly' keratinised cells lack the resistant quality 
of the normal homy layer and, becoming desiccated as the 
result of exposure to air, form the desquamated scale of eczema. 
In the dermis the changes are congestion, oedema, and more or 
less perivascular infiltration with small round cells. Leucocytes 
are not found in the infiltrate in oases uncomplicated by 
secondary pyogenic infection. 

Eczema is brought about by various internal and external 
agents. The older method of classification was purely 
descriptive, e.g., squamous eczema, eczema rubra, eczema 
rimosum. This kind of classification is tending to become 
replaced by one based on the cause, though there still remain 
many cases in which this is either unknown or only partially 
known. 

It is generally accepted that there is an external factor in 
very many cases of eczema ; in some this external exciting 
cause is obvious, e.g., in industrial eczema. Sometimes it is 
no more than exposure to physical stimuli such as sunlight 
or cold winds. It is important to discover whenever possible 
the exciting cause, whether external or internal, and the pre- 
disposing causes. 

External Causes — Traumatic Eczema . — ^This is the result 
of scratching and may be due simply to pruritus or to some 
other pruritic disease such as scabies or pediculosis. 

Parasitic and Microbic Eczemas . — ^The epidermophyton 
interdigitale frequently provokes the eczema reaction on the 
feet and hands, while pyoooccal infection is responsible for a 
large group of eczemas to be later described as infective derma- 
titis and impetigenous eczema. Pyogenic infection may also 
complicate eczema of non-infective origin. 

Chemical Irritants . — ^These are so numerous that it would 
be useless to attempt to enumerate them. Moreover, their 
number is constantly increasing with the growth of industrial 
sdenoe. They may be divided into the following classes : — 

1. Drugs : antiseptics such as lysol, formalin, meronrio 
iodide, io^form, and others. 

2. Substanoes derived from plants, such as primula oboonioa, 
“ poison ” ivy, ohrysanthemums, d^odils, clematis, hops, teak, 
and many othm. 

3. Chemical substanoes used in all kinds of occupations, 
such as bichromate of potassium and ammonium used by 
migravets, tanners, furniture polishers, and others ; aniline 
dyes, especially paraphenylene diamine, used in the process of 



ECZEMA 


1095 

dyeing fur ; metolquinol and sodium hypostdphite by photo- 
graphers ; soda by housewives ; lime and cement by builders ; 
sugar by sweetmakers ; dough and flour by bakers ; turpentine 
by painters. 

Predisposing Causes of Eczema. — All these external agents 
provpke the eczema reaction only in predisposed individuals. 
Were this not so, almost everyone would develop eczema from 
time to time. Often the nature of this special disposition, 
which may run in families, is unknown, but sometimes it can 
be recognised. Among recognisable factors are excessive 
sweating and excessive dryness of the skin (ichthyosis) ; fair 
tender skins are more often attacked than those which pigment 
normally ; the resistance of the skin to external irritation 
diminishes with advancing years, and a high proportion of the 
cases occur from middle age onwards. Obesity is a common 
factor in the intertrigenous eczemas. The devitalising effect 
of vascular hypostasis, particularly in relation to trauma and 
infection, is seen in the common varicose eczema. The question 
of idiosyncrasy and allergy is discussed elsewhere. 

Symptoms of Eczema. — In an acute outbreak of eczema 
or in an exacerbation of a chronic eczema there is always in 
addition to more or less severe pruritus, which is a constant 
symptom, some degree of malaise and occasionally slight 
fever. The eruption itself is almost always pol3miorphic, 
some of the lesions exhibiting vesiculation, some crusting or 
weeping, or, in the healing stage, desquamation. Different 
stages of the reaction may be foimd in different parts of the 
same patch of eczema. An important objective symptom is 
oedema of the true skin. This gives to the lesions a somewhat 
firm consistency. The attack begins with a patch of erythema 
which quickly becomes sown with epidermal vesicles, which 
approach the surface, rupture, and discharge clear serum. The 
serum dries and forms crusts. If these be removed, tiny 
superficial pits are observed, which continue to discharge 
serum. The weeping stage usually lasts several days and 
is followed by a squamous stage. The desquamation may be 
slight and furfuraoeous or abundant. On the palms and 
soles desquamation is usually specially abundant, or there 
may be marked thickening of the homy layer. The vesicular 
stage may be lacking firom the first, which means that the 
primary vesicle has l^n too small to be seen with the naked 
eye, A patch of eczema may resolve completely or it may 
persist. Often chronicity is the result of persistent scratching ; 
in the course of several weeks an infiltra^ patch is product 
with marked epidermal thickening. In such a patch the normal 



1096 CSOMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

fuirows of the skin become accentuated. This stage is known 
as liohenifioation. 

During the weeping stage the serum often becomes infected 
with pyogenic organisms. This secondary infection or im- 
petiginisation can give rise to foUicuhtis, boils, abscesses, adenitis, 
lymphcuigitis, sycosis, and blepharitis. 

Distribution and Configuration. — ^Eczema has a predilection 
for exposed surfaces and for the large articular and other folds, 
but no part of the surface is exempt. There are, however, 
cortain well-defined varieties which merit separate description. 

Eczema is usually disposed in irregular patches of variable 
size, but sometimes it occurs in coin-shaped plaques, often 
found on the forearms, backs of the hands, and thighs, though 
not infrequently on other parts of the b(^y. Th^ type heus 
received the descriptive name of nummular eczema or papulo- 
vesicular eczema. The lesions begin usually as a single large 
vesicle situated on a papular base. Other similar vesicles 
quickly appear in the immediate neighbourhood. In the 
course of ^ys a confiuent, rather firm plaque is formed. 
With rupture of the vesicles a superficial confiuent crust 
forms. The eruption comes out in crops and is frequently 
associated with patches of the ordinary irregular type. 
Nummular eczema is recognised as ocourring commonly in 
connection with either a long-standing chronic patch of eczema, 
e.g., varicose eczema, or with some local septic lesion of the 
skin, e.g., a whitlow, boil, discharging sinus, or infected wound. 
In many cases, however, no primary sensitising focus can be 
found in the skin or elsewhere. 

Dysidrosia or Cheiropompholyx . — ^The eruption which was 
first described by Tilbury Fox, begins in the form of epidermal 
vesicles upon the palms and soles and lateral aspects of the 
fingers and toes. Owing to the thickness of the homy layer in 
these regions, the vesicles seldom rapture, and feel hke lead shot 
in the skin. Occasionally they rupture, particularly on the 
fingers, but as a rule they are absorbed in the course of three 
to four weeks and give place to desquamation. Generally this 
is very abundant, and regeneration of the homy epidermis 
takes place slowly in the course of three or four we^. During 
the eruptive stage itching is a pronounced symptom. Dysidrosis 
occurs almost exclusively in subjects with hyperhidrosis of the 
palms and soles ; it is a recurrent disease and is comparatively 
common in the warmer months. In some subjects, however, it 
recurs at more or less regular intervals irrespective of tempera- 
ture. Tilbury Fox believed that dysidrosis was caused by an 
acute dilatation of the swMt ducts, hut histological studies 



ECZEMA 1097 

have shown that the primary lesion is an eczematous vesicle. 
It is evident, however, that the disease is related to a dis- 
turbance of the sweat apparatus, the precise nature of which 
is at present undetermined. True dysidrosis has to be dilEEer- 
entiated from a number of eruptions of varying aetiology with 
which it is objectively identical. Thus there is a type of 
dysidrosiform fungus Section of the soles and palms caused 
by the epidermophyton interdigitale, and also a type associated 
with seborrhoeic eczema. Another is caused by external 
irritants, a dysidrosiform eruption being quite commonly of 
occupational origin ; or a dysidrosiform eczema may be found 
associated with other forms of eczema elsewhere. A somewhat 
intractable eczema of the dysidrosis type has been met with fre- 
quently during the war as a complication of scabies in children. 
The immediate cause appears to be the more or less severe 
septic infection of the hands and feet which often complicates 
scabies in children. But the dysidrotic eruption persists often 
for weeks or months after the scabies and sepsis have apparently 
cleared up. The differential diagnosis, particularly of a first 
attack, may be difficult, and it is essential, when the feet 
are attack^, to exclude fungus infection by microscopical 
examination. 

Keratotic Eczema of the Palms and Soles. — ^This type occurs 
most commonly in elderly subjects. It is accompanied often 
by deep fissure in the natural folds. 

Hypostatic and Varicose Eczema. — This type, due to vascular 
stasis, is often found over the malleoli, about the ankles, feet, 
and on the legs, chiefly in heavy subjects with or without 
varicose veins. An area of vesietdar, squamous or lichenified 
eczema may be foimd, which frequently becomes impetiginous. 
Similar areas of chronic eczema are found on the legs in elderly 
subjects in the absence of varicosities, and are to be attributed 
both to hypostasis and senile devitalisation of the skin. In 
some oases the whole of the leg may be involved. 

Impetigenous Eczema and Infective Dermatitis. — ^In neglected 
impetigo, particularly of the scalp, nsres, labial commissures 
and ears, chronic eczema fr^uently supervenes. The skin 
becomes sensitised to the infecting organisms or to the products 
of tissue disintegration, and a simple pyodermia becomes trans- 
formed into a pyogenic eczema, or the infection may be ^e 
result of recent measles, whooping-cough or other infection 
involving the nose and throat. There is a tendency for the 
process to extend to the intertrigenous folds, especially the 
umbilicus, axillae and the genito-orural r^ion. In acute cases 
the scalp, ears, amd post-aurioulakr folds pour with serum. This 



1098 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

is followed by a crusted stage, and finally by a stage with 
oonstant desquamation. Sometimes the hair is suddenly shed, 
either partially or completely, during an attack, and following 
this event recovery is usually rapid. Belapses may take place 
at intervals throughout life. 

Compound fractures are sometimes complicated by eczema, 
particularly when the limb has been encased in plaster. 
Beginning at the site of fracture, it extends gradually to form 
a sharply marginated area of eczema of varying dimensions, 
sometimes involving the greater part of the limb. Recovery 
takes place satisfactorily in the absence of residual necrosis 
of bone. The same change is met with in relation to osteo- 
myelitis, chronic otorrhoea, and any other persistent pyogenic 
infection involving the skin. 

Intertrigenous eczema of the large folds is often due 
primarily to pyococcal infection ; for this excessive sweating 
and sometimes obesity are often partly responsible. This 
type of eczema is often very persistent, far more so than the 
somewhat similar eruptions due to epidermophyton inguinale 
and oidium albicans. 

Seborrhoeic Eczema . — ^This is described elsewhere (vide p. 1 103). 

Eczema caused by External Irritants . — Some of the chemical 
substances capable of causing eczema have been already 
mentioned. The lesions do not differ from those of eczema due 
to other causes, and are found primarily on parts exposed to 
the irritant, usually the forearms, wrists, and hands, and 
sometimes the face and neck. The eruption may be vesicular 
or squamous, fissured, secondarily impetiginised in parts or 
lichenified, and disposed more or less uniformly in the areas 
affected, or in nummular or irregular patches. There is a 
tendency to spread beyond the regions primarily affected, 
Bjg., to the face and neck and the fiexures. The extension 
is thought to be due to some sensitising substance derived from 
the initial focus. 

The substances commonly responsible for occupational 
eczema are irritating only to susceptible individuals. Subjects 
with hyperhidrosis or ichthyosis, or with fair tender skins, are 
more liable to become sensitive than are those with normal 
skins. Susceptibility is generally acquired after prolonged 
contact with the irritant substance ; or, expressed in another 
way, the skin after sustaining for years the impact of some 
damaging substance, evmtually breaJts down ; this often occurs 
after many years, and at an age when the natural resistance of 
the akin is diminishing. Vax more rardly smisitivity is exhibited 
almost immediately (idiosyncsrasy). In either case the disease 



ECZEMA 


1099 


is cured either rapidly or sometimes, particularly in the former 
group, with considerable difficulty after cessation of contact 
with the irritant substance. Eventually the altin may appear 
to be normal, but re-exposure invariably excites a recurrence. 
Moreover, the individual has often acquired a tendency to 
develop eczema on exposure to chemical irritants other than 
those which he has previously handled. 

The frequent employment of the term dermatitis for the 
eczema reaction has given rise to a certain amount of confusion, 
and no general agreement appears likely to be reached in this 
point in terminology. It has been suggested that when the 
cause is a known irritant, whether it reaches the skin from 
outside or by the blood-stream, the case should be labelled 
dermatitis. Thus there are occupational or professional 
dermatitis ; dermatitis venenata where the irritant is a plant ; 
toxic dermatitis ; infective dermatitis ; solar dermatitis, etc. 
This leaves for eczema only certain idiopathic types, such as 
nummtilar eczema. This is a simple way of indicating that 
the exciting cause is known. But it is necessary to recognise 
that the term dermatitis thus applied includes all types of 
inflammatory response to an irritant, and these are not always 
eczematous. Thus the reaction to sun or wind may be simply 
erythema followed by peeling, or it may, in certain cases, be 
eczematous, and the same diflerenoes may be met with in 
relation to other irritants. 

Thus it would be correct to describe the eczematous cases 
as eczema ; occupational, infective, solar, etc., and the non- 
eczematous as dermatitis. But this would lead to difficulties 
in certification of unfitness for work, since imder the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act any reaction of the skin provoked by 
industrial irritants has to be certified as “ dermatitis.” 

The difficulty can be overcome by adding to dermatitis the 
qualifying term “ eczematous ” in the appropriate oases. 

Disseminated Neurodermatitis. — ^Long-continued eczema, of 
whatever origin, is often followed by several large or small 
areas of lichenification. Owing to f(he repeated scratching to 
which these intensely pruritic areas are subjected, they may 
persist almost indefinitely. As its name implies, there is often 
in this condition a background of nervous instability. 

Infaatite Enema and the Eczema-Asthma Complex. — 
There are three well-defined types of Infantile eczema ; (1) 
primary eczema of the face ; (2) eczema of the scalp of infective 
origin ; (3) eczema derived from napkin erythema. 

Primary Bcxema of the Face ( Atopic Eczema). — ^This occurs 
at any period from the second month onwards, and usutdly 



1100 COMMON DISEASES OP THE SKIN 

affects the forehead and cheeks, but spares the nose and chin. 
Other parts of the body are alro often affected. The eczema 
may take the form of a Tesicolar and weeping eruption in fat 
children, but is often dry and scaly in marasmic iiifants. The 
scalp is usually spared at first, but is generally inyolved 
eventually by direct extension of the process. The condition 
may clear up quickly, but is more often intractable. It may 
disappear at the end of the teething period. When it persists, 
it tends largely to leave the face and to appear predominantly 
in the flexures in the form of lichenification. In this phase of 
the condition, which is known usually as Prurigo of Be^er, the 
lesions are determined almost entirely by scratching. It may 
persist with remissions and exacerbations to puberty or into 
adult life, and even after disappearance in infancy may recur 
in later years. About 30 per cent, of the oases develop asthma 
or chronic bronchitis, usu^y from three years of age onwards ; 
about 20 per cent, have ichthyosis. When the disease occurs 
in older cMdren or in adults, the constant friction and conse- 
quent thickening of the skin of the face produces a characteristic 
rigid aspect. Accentuation of the normal furrows about the 
mouth is often striking in these older subjects, and this, com- 
bined with an earthy complexion, which is equally characteristic, 
is a safe guide to the correct diagnosis. .These patients are often 
sensitive to one or more allergens, such as foodstuffs, animal 
emanations, and poUens, but although these may give rise to 
such temporary 8)rmptom8 as sickness, urticaria, swelling of 
the mouth or hay fever, they are evidently not responsible for 
the constant itching and prurigo. In infancy absorption of fat 
is almost always imperfect. 

InfarUiU Eczema of the Scalp . — ^This type, which begins at 
about the same period as the preceding, appears usually to 
originate from pityriasis of the scalp. The sc^es are sometimes 
found on examination to be infected with the pit 3 rrosporon. 
In some cases it is possible that the infection may be transmitted 
from the parents. The eczema may be vesicular, crusted, or 
squamous, and tends to extend to the post-auricular grooves, 
the neck, and the face, and sometimes to other parts. It is 
more ammiable to treatment than the preceding type. 

InUrtriginoua Eczema . — ^This usually occm» primarily in 
the napkin area as a diffuse erythema affecting the convex 
surfaces of the buttocks and thig^, and is due to the irritating 
action of the urine, which is nearly always ammoniaoal. Hus 
change is caused by the action of a bacillus found in the fieces 
which has the property of converting urea into ammonia. 
AHhou^ a rimple erythemafto begin with, the condition tends 



ECZEMA 1101 

to spread into the ingoinocrural and intergluteal folds and to 
become eczematous. The eczema may become widespread. 

Tbeatment of Eczema 

The subject is too large to be dealt with here in any but the 
most summary fashion. The treatment of eczema is greatly 
facilitated if the cause can be accurately ascertained and 
eliminated. In certain cases rapid cures are often achieved by 
the successful treatment of a focus of origin, such as a patch 
of lichenifioation, a varicose ulcer, or any chronic septic lesion 
in the skin ; in others by the discovery of an unrecognised 
external factor, such as a plant to wl^h the individual is 
sensitive ; or by cessation of work in eczema of occupational 
origin. Enough has already been said regarding the causes 
of the various types of eczema to indicate the manner in 
which a given case eJiould be investigated. Of equal importance 
is the alleviation of symptoms by local and general measures. 

Local Treatment . — ^There are certain principles to be 
observed, but the treatment must be elastic, varying according 
to the stage of the disease. Its object, which is to restore a 
damaged epidermis to its normal state, and particularly to 
assure that the horny layer is fully re-established, is best 
attained by careful protective measures. 

In the acute erythematous and vesicular stages, in order to 
facilitate evaporation and drainage of serum and to cool an 
inflamed surface, it is advisable to use simple watery lotions, 
watery pastes, or oily liniments containing no antiseptic. 
Calamine lotion, lead lotion, or calamine liniment may be used 
for this purpose. 

In impetiginous and crusted eczemas accumulated crusts 
must be removed; this is often best accomplished by boric 
compresses or starch and boric poultices, or it may be advisable 
to soak off impetiginous crusts with a we^ antiseptic, 
e.g., solution of potassium permanganate 1 in 4,000, or 
silver nitrate 1 or 2 per cent, in, water, before applying 
any other remedy. 

Eczemas of infective origin, e.g., those which complicate 
impetigo and many intertrigenous eczemas of the ears, gro^, 
submammaiy folds, etc., sometimes respond well to the applica- 
tfon of a dye such as gentian violet J to 1 per cent, in calamine 
lotion. The sulphonamide drugs are also useful in this group, 
e.g., sodium sulphaoetamide 5 per cent, in aqueous solutfon. 
Tb^ drugs, however, applied locally, occasionally cause 
allergic reactions, usually of the eczematous type. 



1102 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


In the natural oourse of events the weeping stage of eczema 
is succeeded by desquamation (parakeratosis). At this stage 
protective creams and pastes which formerly woidd have been 
badly tolerated are indicated. These replace in part the fat 
which is lacking in the parakeratotic cells. 

When, as a result of repeated scratching, lichenified and 
indolent infiltrated patches of eczema are produced, it is usually 
advisable to add one of the reducing agents such as ichthyol, 
tar, or lenigallol in varying proportions to a paste or cream 
(vi^ p. 1138). To such patches X-rays appli^ in fractional 
doses are often of the greatest value. 

Oeneral Measures , — ^In the acute stage of eczema there is 
no general measure more valuable than complete mental and 
physical rest. The digestion and excretory functions must 
receive careful attention. 

There are no hard and fast rules regarding diet in eczema ; 
overfed obese subjects benefit from a weight-reducing regime ; 
equally malnutrition when present in eczema should receive 
appropriate dietetic treatment. Alcohol should be forbidden. 
In atopic eczema the diet should be free from allergens to which 
the patient is found to be sensitive. 

Treatment by Internal Remedies . — ^The eczematous reaction 
results from numerous causes, and these is no single remedy 
capable of universal application in its treatment. Drugs are 
of value only in exceptional cases. The daily intravenous 
injection of a 10 per cent, solution of sodium or strontium 
bromide in physiological saline is of value in reducing oedema 
and weeping in cases of widespread eczema, but not in localised 
cases. Autohsemotherapy, the injection of 10 to 15 c.c. of the 
patient’s own blood into a muscle, about every five days meets 
with success in a number of widespread but not localised eczemas. 


ERYTHEMATO-SQUAMOUS DERMATOSES 

A number of dmmatoses consist essentially of dry scaly 
erythematous spots and patches. Among th^ are certain 
oases of ringworm infection, lupus erythematosus, the t 3 rpe 
of streptococcal infection ^own as pityriasifonn impetigo, 
some irritant and toxic eczemas, and seborrhosio eczema. 
Under the heading of erytimmato-squamous dermatoses axe 
also indnded three unrelated dermatoses of unknown cause, 
namely Htyiiasis, rosea. Psoriasis, and the Parapsoriases. For 
a desodption of the last named the reader is referred to works 
on dennatok^. 



ERVTHEMATO-SQUAMOUS DERMATOSES 1103 


Sebobbhceio Eczema 

Unna aasembled under the name of seborrhoeic eczema a 
group of eruptions which though differing from one another 
in some respects had certain characteristics in common ; there 
were also transitional forms linkin g the different members of 
the group. He used the term seborrhoeic because the principal 
member is found in seborrhoeic subjects, and on parts in which 
sebaceous secretion is most abimdant. Nevertheless the term 
is not accepted universally, the French school, particularly, 
rejecting the role of seborrhoea in their genesis. Darier, reject- 
ing seborrhoea as an essential factor but recognising a close 
relationship with eczema, named them eczematides. Con- 
fusion has also arisen fix>m a tendency to apply the term sebor- 
rhoeic eczema loosely to any eczema occurring in seborrhoeic 
subjects, and to eczema of whatever origin attacking the scalp 
or the large folds. Using the term in its original restricted 
sense, the members of the group seborrhoeic eczema or 
eczematides are six in number. 

They occur most often though not invariably on a seborrhoeic 
or kerotic background, and dandruff is usually abundant. 

Stbarrhaic Eczema of the Scalp . — ^Dandruff or pityriasis 
capitis is probably universal, though more abundant in some, 
usually seborrhoeic, subjects than in others. The scales are 
not dried sebaceous secretion as they were believed to be at one 
time, but desquamated homy scales. Dandruff gives rise to a 
certain amount of itching, and it is sometimes associated with 
inflammation. The scalp is generally dry, red, and scaly, but 
sometimes there is serous oozing. The same changes often take 
place in the eyebrows, and along the margins of the eyelids 
(seborrhoeic blepharitis), while there is also a tendency for it 
to spresul flom the scalp to the ears and on to the neck ; dry 
scaly areas are oommoiily found on the fsMse. Boils, impetigo, 
and fissures occupying the post-auricular folds, or the comers 
of the lips or the nares are common <»paplioationB. 

The Figwate Type . — ^The sites of Action are the centre 
of the chest and back ; it is the most common variety, and it 
consists of dry scaly patches of petaloid outline. The initial 
lesion is a dry red papule of about the size of a small pin-head, 
or a group of papules. By the addition of fieeh papules the 
lesion spr^uls oentrifugaily, while those in the centre cfisappear, 
leaving a fawn-colour^ scale, greasy to touch. These pet^oid 
lenons eventually become almost stationary and persist if 
untreated for months or years. 



1104 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

FoUictdor Type. — ^This oonsiste of an acute or 
Bubaoute follicular papular eruption occurring chiefly on the 
chest and back. The lesions arise in the course of a few days 
wd do not in the early stage exhibit the figured patches of the 
dry type, although eventually some such patches may be formed 
by confluence and involution of the papular lesions. This 
variety occurs commonly in subjects with hyperhidrosis 
and in those who work in warm rooms or wear woollen 
or flannel garments next to the skin. The same factors 
predispose also to the production of the figured type. The 
eruption is irritable. 

Pityriaaiform Type. — ^The lesions are dry, superficial, scaly 
patches which resemble somewhat the lesions of pityriasis 
rosea. They have an acute onset amd occur quite often on 
the limbs as well as on the chest, back, and aMomen. This 
type may be accompanied by vesicular eczema of the palms 
and soles or of the flexures. 

Paoriaaiform Type. — Seborrhoeic dermatitis seldom resembles 
psoriasis, but occasionally lesions practically indistinguishable 
fix>m psoriasis are produced. They occur chiefly along the 
extensor aspects and occasionally on the chest and back. 
They consist of irregular patches with lamellated scales, which 
sometimes, though not always, spread oentrifiigaUy and clear 
in the cmitie like the figured patches. 

Qeneraliaed Seborrh^ DermatUia. — ^In this rare condition 
the individual follicular papules coalesce to form large 
desquamating areas covering a great portion of the skin. 

Mitiology. — ^The scales of dwdruff are found, on staining, 
to contain groups of spores of varying shapes — oval, round, 
dumb-bells, or gourds ; this organism is a flask-hke fungus, known 
as the Bottle bacillus, spore of Mallasez, or pityrosporon ; its 
disposition in the scales is similar to that of miorosporon furfur 
in pityriasiB versioolor, wd it is widely believed to be the cause 
of the desquamation. The jntyrosporon has been cultivated, 
and its implantation on the Hghtly scarified skin has bemi 
followed by the appearance of lesions like those of the figurate 
eommatade. The writer and J. M. H. Madeod obtained similar 
re^ts by impiantation of a monilia grown from tiie scales of 
dandruff. Unna thought that dandruff and seborrhaeio eczema 
might be due to a combination of two organisms, the Bot^ 
badUus and what he called the morococons, now aaenmed to 
have been Bta|hyk>ooocii8 albus. On the whole, it seems 
likely that the incblent petaloid variety of mmnbers of 
the group may be due to tiie growth on tiie skin of tlw 
ja^rosporon. 



ERYTHEMATO-SQUAMOUS DERMATOSES 1 106 

It has been held by Ravaut that the more acute and wide- 
spread types represent an allergic reaction to infection by 
yeast-like organisms, growing, for example, in intertriginous 
folds and provoking there the eczema reaction. 

The tendency appears to be to look for infection as the 
direct cause, and a variety of other factors, including seborrhoea, 
as predisposing causes. In this latter respect the problem is 
the same as that presented by eczema in general. 

Treatment. — ^The dry figured type of seborrhoeic dermatitis 
is easily cured by the application of pastes and ointments 
containing sulphur. For the more acute types sulphur is 
usually too irritating. Pastes and creams containing solution 
of tar or ichthyol are generally found valuable. The general 
management of the more acute cases is similar to that of 
eczema due to other causes. 

Pityriasis Rosea 

The eruption consists of two types of lesion : — 

1. Pink squamous macules, irregular in shape and varying 
in size from a pin’s head to a lentil or larger. 

2. Circumscribed oval macules, generally described as 
medallions. The periphery of the lesion is often pink and 
slightly raised, while the centre is fawn-coloured. The scales 
are o^n arranged as a collarette just inside the peripheral 
pink zone. Moderate pruritus is usually present. 

Usually the generalised eruption is preceded for several days 
by a single me^llion larger than those which are to follow. 
This is c^ed the herald patch. The disease runs a self-limited 
course and clears up within two months. Slight enlargement 
of the lymphatic glands may be present, and it is extremely 
probable that the condition is caused by an infective agent. 
Recurrences are very rare. 

Treatment . — Pityriasis rosea is better left untreated. To 
allay irritation, when present, phenolated ccdamine lotion 
may be used. Ointments are badly tolerated. 

Psoriasis 

This important disease is one of the commonest in derma- 
tology and one of the most intractable. It occurs in the form 
of red scaly spots, patches, and even sheets of the greatest 
possible variety of shapes cmd sizes. The terms guttate, 
nummular, discoid, gyrate, circinate, rupioid, and others are 
descriptive names applied to the numerous varieties of the 
70 



1106 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

disease. The characteristic lesion consists of a red patch or 
spot covered with dry lamellated scales, which are heaped up 
on one another to a variable degree, and when gently scraped 
with a curette exhibit a silvery lustre. Complete removal of 
the scaly portion of the lesion exposes a red glistening surface 
upon which soon appear fine bleeding points. Psoriasis appears 
particularly upon prominences and on other parts- which are 
naturally subjected to trauma ; thus the scalp is rarely spared, 
and the elbows and knees are almost invariably affected. The 
extensor surfaces of the limbs suffer more firequently than the 
fiexor surfaces, but no part of the body is exempt. The exposed 
surfaces are less often attacked than the covered parts. The 
eruption may be extremely profuse or limited to a few spots. 
The scalp may be affected alone, or the nails alone, or the 
palms and soles, or the elbows and knees. There is a strong 
tendency to symmetry and uniformity of lesion. 

Psoriasis of the Scalp. — This is frequently mistaken for 
seborrhoeic dermatitis. On the scalp psoriasis generally occurs 
in the form of well circumscribed patches with marked heaping 
up of scales on the surface and with intervening normal areas 
of scalp, while seborrhoeic dermatitis is usually ^tributed over 
the whole scalp, and the scales are less lamellated. 

Inlertrigenous Psoriasis. — ^This type affects particularly the 
mticular and other folds, and is usually dispos^ in large flat 
patches covered with crusts rather than scales, often ^ured 
and sometimes weeping. This variety, which closely resembles 
eczema, is rather frequent in elderly and obese subjects ; the 
deep red colour and sharp outline of the plaques are sufficient 
to ^tinguish them firom eczema. 

Exudative Psoriasis. — Psoriasis may be disposed in extensive 
red sheets constantly desquamating, sometimes weeping in 
parte, and covering a considerable proportion of the body. 

Psoriasis of the Nails. — ^This may exist alone. The nails are 
pitted, longitudinally or transversely striated, and thickened to a 
varying d^pree. They may be partially separated from their beds. 

Psoriasis of the Palms and Sola. — This exists usually in 
company with psoriasis elsewhere either in the form of well 
circumscribed hyperkeratotic plaques or of a confluent area 
involving tiie whole or the greater part of the palmar surface. 
It is not usually irritable. 

Pustular Psoriasis . — ^This extremely intractable condition 
occurs almost invariably on fhe palms and soles, and consists 
of red scaly areas of variable d^nsions and r^pe studded 
with intraepidermal yellow pustules of about the size of a 
small pin’s head. The pustules dry up in the course of a few 



ERYTHEMATO-SQUAMOUS DERMATOSES 1107 

days and are at first replaced by small yellowish brown spots 
consisting of dead epithelium and leucocytes, which eventually 
separate to leave shallow pits bounded by a detached homy 
collar. Fresh pustules continue to appear both in the affected 
areas and in the neighbouring healthy skin. 

Arthropaihic Psoriasis . — Psoriasis is commonly associated 
with rheumatism of all degrees, ranging from slight stiffness in 
one or two joints to severe rheumatoid arthritis ; the psoriasis 
is in such cases often extensive and inveterate. 

Evolution and Prognosis. — Psoriasis begins usually as an 
acute attack affecting the limbs and trunk. The lesions are 
usually, though not inveuiably, of the guttate type in the first 
attack. Thereafter, one attack succeeds another, with intervals 
of comparative, though seldom complete, freedom. While 
exacerbations and remissions are the general rule, a certain 
number of patients have only a few lesions, often on the points 
of predilection, which last for years. Under treatment 
psoriasis may sometimes be made to clear up entirely. With 
the disappearance of the spots, depigmented patches are 
generally left, particularly after treatment with chrysarobin ; 
sometimes, however, pigmented patches remain for months. 
No case can be regard^ as permanently cured. 

iBtiology. — Psoriasis may occur at any age, in both sexes, 
in all races, and in all countries. First attacks are most 
common at school age and adolescence, but are not very un- 
common in old age. Though the precise causes are quite 
unknown certain setiological factors are established, of which 
the most important is heredity. The exciting factors are 
variable or apparently non-existent in many cases. Pregnancy 
is an exciting cause in some cases, while others are only free 
from psoriasis during pregnancy and lactation. Trauma is 
a well recognised cause, and the occurrence of psoriasis ux>on 
prominences is an expression of this factor. The first attack 
of an acute guttate psoriasis is very often preceded by 
tonsUlitis. On the other hand, psoriasis may clear up during 
a severe febrile illness. The seasons and climate have an 
influence on its production ; it is said to be uncommon in the 
tropics. In the present state of knowledge perhaps the most 
rational view is that there is an inherent fault in the skin of 
some individuals who have an innate predisposition, often 
obviously inherited, to react in the form of psoriasis to various 
stimuli, internal and external. 

Treatment. — ^This consists mainly in the application of 
various remedies which have {nrov^ capable of curing the 
condition temporarily. The first stage of local treatment 



1108 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


consists in the removed of the soales. This is done by softening 
for severtd days with salioylated olive oil or with a simple 
ointment containing sedioylio acid, and is further facilitated by 
the daily use of soap and warm water, using a nedl brush. A 
preparation containing one or other of the reducing agents is 
then used. Solution of coal tar, crude tar, oil of cade, chrysa- 
robin, dithranol, pyrogallol and resorcinol, or a combination 
of two or more of these drugs are those most frequently employed, 
of which the last two are the most effective, though dirty and 
sometimes badly tolerated. Dithranol, a more active but 
cleaner derivative of chrysarobin, is now often used. X-rays 
are often used to clear up obstinate patches, but although a- 
clean method and usually successful, this form of treatment 
is unsatisfactory on accoimt of the risk of damaging the skin. 
Thorium X is somewhat less effective but can be used with 
safety. The mercury vapour and carbon arc lamps have been 
used successfully in some cases as local treatment, especially 
in combination with crude coal tar. 

There is no known rational or reliable general remedy. 
Arsenic by mouth is rightly used less than formerly ; it is 
often temporarily effective in suitable cases, but its prolonged 
or too often repeated use has sometimes led to degenerative 
change in the skin, and occasionally to carcinomata. Other- 
wise temporary success has been claimed from time to time 
for a long list of remedies, e.g., the intramuscular injection of 
whole milk, sulphur in oil, turpentine, and salvarsan derivatives ; 
by mouth, salicin, iodine, thyroid extract, sulphur, calciferol 
in large doses combined with exposures to ultra-violet light, 
and many others. In fact we have to rely chiefly on correctly 
applied local treatment, which in extensive or severe cases 
is best carried out in hospital and combined with rest. 


ALLERGY AND DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

The term “ allergy ” (altered reaction) was coined by 
Von Pirquet to denote the alteration in degree of sensitivity 
of the sUm to Koch’s old tuberculin which he observed during 
tile various phases of tuberculosis. It was heightened during 
some phases and diminished or absent in others, such as 
advano^ pulmonary tuberculosis. From that time the 
term has been employed to cover an ever-increasing field, 
including some conditions which appew to be closely related 
to anaphylaxis. 

At the present time the term is generally held to imply 



ALLERGY AND DISEASES OF THE SKIN 1109 

reactivity to an agent of any kind which at some previous time 
provoked no reaction at all or a slighter one. 

Coca classifies the manifestations of allergy as follows ; — 

1. Serum sickness. 2. Atopy. 3. Drug allergy. 4. 
Bacterial allergy. 5. Dermatitis — sensitivity to 
external irritants. 

Coca coined the term “ atopy ” to denote a special liability to 
develop sensitivities of various kinds that often runs in families 
and under atopic diseases he includes atopic eczema, asthma, 
hay fever, and urticaria. Among the manifestations of the atopic 
state there is a strong tendency to develop sensitivity to various 
food stuffs, animal emanations, pollens, and even house dust. 

The presence of such hypersensitivity can be demonstrated 
by the passive transfer test (Prausnitz-Kiistner reaction). A 
drop of the serum of a sensitive subject is injected intradermally 
into a normal subject. Within about half an hour the site of 
injection will exhibit sensitivity to an extract of the substance 
to which the patient is sensitive when applied as a skin test, 
by scratch test or intradermal injection, or if a food, when 
taken by mouth. This reaction becomes more pronounced 
after twenty-four hours and the sensitised patch of skin remains 
sensitive for several weeks. 

Sensitivity to foods is manifested either by alimentary 
intolerance, sickness or diarrhoea, by swelling of the lips or 
face, or by generalised erythema or urticaria. It has been too 
readily assumed that infantile eczema is the result of hyper- 
sensitivity to food. This condition appears and persists in 
infants on a pure milk diet, in whom sensitivity to milk is 
absent. Most of them give a positive reaction to egg, even 
when no egg has been given at any time, and the strict 
avoidance of egg does not usually terminate the eczema. The 
exact mechanism of this type of atopy has not yet been clearly 
demonstrated. 

Ubticabia 

Symptoms. — ^This common condition is characterised by the 
development of transient wheals. The first objective symptom 
is a patch of erythema, which is quickly followed in a typic^ 
lesion by formation of a central wheal surrounded by a peri- 
pheral erythematous zone. The lesions may be round, ovaJ, or 
of polycyclic outline ; they sxe of all sizes, and may occur on 
any part of the body. They are invariably accompanied by 
severe itching, which is greatest in the erythematous or even 
the pre-eiythematous stage of the lesion. The swelling slowly 



1110 


COMMON DISEASES OP THE SKIN 


Bubeides, to disappear as a role within a few hours. An acute 
attack may be accompanied by transient slight fever. 

Varieties. — ^Modifications in the objective features of urticaria 
have given rise to special names. In giant xirticaria or angio- 
neurotic oedema the lesions are large oedematous swellings 
involving the subcutaneous tissue, and often the mucous 
membranes, particularly of the mouth, and occasionally of 
the pharynx and larynx. The condition may or may not 
be accompanied by the common type of wheal. 

Bullous urticaria, in which some of the lesions consist of large 
buUffi, is rare. Extravasation of blood into the lesions has given 
rise to the name luemorrhagic urticaria ; this also is uncommon. 

Urticaria Due to Heat . — ^This not very common variety has 
been studied by B. T. Grant and Bruce Pearson. It appears 
only as the result of heat or emotion. Strenuous exercise, 
hot baths, or emotional excitement are followed by a generalised 
crop of small urticarial spots which persist for a few hours 
and do not re-appear until the patient is again subjected to 
the same conditions. A severe attack is followed by a short 
refractory period during which exercise may be taken with 
impunity. Most of the subjects have been young women. 

Urticaria Due to Cold . — ^After exposure to cold air or 
cold water the part of the skin so exposed becomes the site of 
an urticarial eruption or patchy erythema similar to that 
caused by heat. Occasionally the two conditions are found in 
rile same subject. 

Course and Prognosis. — A proportion of urticarias are due 
to the ingestion of some food sti^ to which the individual is 
sensitive or to partiidly decomposed food. These oases seldom 
prasist for more than a few weeks. There are, however, a 
great number of chronic urticarias in which it appears to be 
impossible to incriminate any food stuff as the cause, and these 
may jiersist for many months or even years with occasional 
remissions. Angioneurotic oedema or giant mliioaria is a 
particularly persistent type. 

and Patiiogsnesis. — ^The urticarial reaction may 
be called forth by numerous causes of external or internal 
origin. The sting of a nettle, and the bites of mosquitoes, 
Asm, bugs, and oriier insects arouse urticarial reactions of 
varying intensity according to individual susceptibility. Of 
internal causes the best known is the iiwestion of a protein 
to which the individual is susceptible. Fish, egg, pork, decom- 
posing food of any kind, and strawberries are the most fimquent 
examples. Hydatids and intesUnal worms are occasional 
canses. 



ALLERGY AND DISEASES OP THE SKIN 1111 

Urticaria may also be caused by toxic products developed 
in the body. Thus it may occur in pregnancy and in the course 
of disease. Emotional instability is met with frequently in 
chronic urticaria and is widely held to be a relatively common 
causal factor. 

The researches of Lewis and Grant have thrown light on 
the mode or production of urticaria. It has been shown that 
a lesion identical with an urticarial wheal may be produced 
by pricking into the skin a drop of a solution of histamine 
of 1 in 20,000 dilution. The reaction so produced is threefold 
in nature : first, capillary dilatation, due to the direct action 
of histamine on the capillary wall, then an areolar flush due 
to reflex dilatation of arterioles round the puncture, then 
increased permeability of the capillary wall leading to oedema, 
t.e., wheal formation. 

The mechanism of urticaria caused by sensitivity to food 
has been shown to be related to anaphylaxis by the study of 
the passive transfer reaction. It is assumed that in the 
affected tissues there are fixed antibodies and that the inter- 
action of such antibodies with the food stuff gives rise to an 
explosive reaction perhaps with a liberation of histamine. In 
urticaria due to heat the mechanism has been shown also to 
be due to the liberation of histamine. This type can be 
inhibited in an area such as an upper limb by blocking the 
cutaneous nerves. It can also be brought on by the adininis- 
tration of Doryl (acetylcholine). R. T. Gramt and Bruce 
Peaum>n have ^own that first the para-sympathetic nerves 
are stimulated by heat with the liberation of acetylcholine and 
secondarily histamine, presumably in these subjects in excess. 
Exercise may produce in them a histamine effect of such 
severity as to give rise to marked pallor, a rapid pulse and a 
fall in blood pressure. Urticaria due to cold can be passively 
transferred to a normal subject by the intradermal injection 
of the serum of a cold-sensitive subject. The site of the skin 
so treated if immediately exposed to cold, e.g., from a cold 
water top and afterwards warmed,* develops a wheal. It is 
supposed that a (^ermolysin exists in the blood of such subjects 
which, when the skin is exposed to cold, becomes fixed to the 
cutaneous cells lysing them on re-warming. This type of 
urticaria is sometimes found in subjects with paroxysmal 
hsemoglobinuria. In severe chronic urticaria, especially giant 
urticaria, tlie presence of a whealing substance in the circulation 
can be readily demonstrated ; it is absent during remissions. 

Tmtnieiit ol Urtiosria. — Success in the treatment of 
urticaria depends chiefly upon elimination or avoidance of the 



1112 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

cause. When the cause is definitely known to be a food such 
as shell-fish, egg, or strawberries, the prognosis is generally 
good, although an attack may be prolong^ for a few weeks. 

Of treatment by drugs, calcium lactate by mouth or calcium 
chloride injected intramuscularly have been used extensively, 
but with disappointing results. Subcutaneous injections of 
5 to 10 Tninimw of adrenalin hydrochloride have been used 
successfully for the immediate relief of symptoms, and are 
valuable in angio-neurotic oedema, but the effect is transient. 

Chronic Vrticaria. — A small number of these oases have 
cleared up after the eradication of septic foci of various kinds, 
but in the majority of cases the cause is quite obscure. There 
is sometimes an atopic family history, but this is very often 
lacking. The patients have often been sensitive to insect 
bites, and may be said to have a constitutional tendency to 
urticaria. Perhaps some accidental cause provokes the 
urticarial reaction in the first place, and this may persist in 
the complete absence of a demonstrable cause. These cases 
vary enormously in duration. In a certain proportion the 
intramuscular injection every third or fourth day of 10 c.c. of the 
patient’s own blood has bron followed by relief, but in cases 
of long duration this remedy usually fails. For these, complete 
physical and mental rest has proved about the most effective 
remedy. 

Timtment of urticaria by local measures is of secondary 
importance. Lead or calamine lotion with the addition of 
phenol, 10 gr., or liquor picis carbonis 1 drachm to the ounce 
of lotion serve to diminish pruritus. 

Papctlab Ubticabia 

This common condition occurs chiefiy in infants and young 
children. The lesions consist of firm papules surrounded by a 
halo of erythema. Often the central papule is surmounted or 
even replaced by a vesicle or bulla. The eruption may occur 
on any part, and may be mild or of extreme severity. It is 
always markedly pruritic. An attack nonpally lasts about 
three weeks, but may be prolonged for months. The condition 
usually dies out at the age of four or five years, but exceptionally 
it may recur at intervals until puberty or later. In persistont 
cases the lesions become aggregated on parts naturally sub- 
jected to trauma, and particularly along the extensor aspects 
of the limbs and on the buttocks. There is in such oases a 
close resemblance to Hebra’s prurigo, to which disease papular 
urticaria is believed by some to be related. 



LICHEN PLANUS, LICHEN SIMPLEX, ETC. 1113 

Attiology. — ^In the majority of cases of papular urticaria in 
children no cause can be discovered, though rarely it may be 
recognised as a definite article of diet. Attacks occasionally 
occur during the eruption of a tooth. Intestinal worms are 
held to be responsible for some cases. R. Hallam observed 
that the eruption invariably cleared up on admission to hospital 
and that a relapse often followed the return of the patients to 
their homes. Attempts were made to provoke a recurrence 
while in hospital by various dietary restrictions and excesses, 
by giving the patients food prepared at their homes, by making 
them sleep in their own bedclothes, and by sprinkling dust 
from the home in the bed. All failed completely. Papular 
urticaria is not common in adults, and its cause, as in children, 
is obscure. It is occasionally a cutaneous manifestation of 
lymphadenoma and rarely of leukaemia. Hallam’s investiga- 
tions suggest that environment may be the important 
factor. 

Treatment. — ^This consists of the avoidance of the cause in 
the exceptional cases in which it can be recognised. A change 
of locality will often bring about a cure in chronic cases, and 
particularly admission to a hospital ward. For local treatment 
anti-pruritic lotions and powders may be used. Cotton or silk 
garments should be worn next the skin. Secondarily infected 
lesions should be treated by local antiseptic remedies. 


LICHEN PLANUS, LICHEN SIMPLEX AND 
LICHENOID ERUPTIONS 

Lichen Pianos. — ^This common eruption is composed mainly 
of small dry papular elements of polygonal outline of about 
the size of a pin’s head or somewliat larger ; the surface is flat, 
the centre often slightly depressed, umbilicated, and when 
viewed at the right angle it is seen to have a brilliant surface. 
At first pink, the colour later becomes characteristically 
violaceous. Observation with a lens reveals, beneath what 
appears to be a translucent homy covering, opaque white 
streaks, known as Wickham’s striae, disposed irre^arly m 
the papxile, but sometimes radiating like the spokes of a wheel 
from the central umbilication. 

Lichen planus, however, exhibits a good deal of poly- 
morphism, and in addition to the characteristic papules there 
may be : (1) groups of homy follicular lesions, often disposed 
about one or more flat papules (lichen plano-pilaris) ; (2) large 
elements found most often on the lower extremities, but 



1114 COMMON DISEASES OP THE SKIN 

occasionally on other parts as well, hard and warty, raised 
well above the surface, or flat with a rough homy surface; 
(3) in the opening stages of an acute attack the lesions may 
be simply erythematous patches and spots bearing a close 
resemblance to pityriasis rosea ; among them the characteristic 
papules appear shortly. (4) In the rare lichen planus of the 
scalp the lichen pileiris type of lesion is usually found in groups ; 
these are sometimes replaced finally by patches of cicatricial 
atrophy ; similar areas are occasionally found in the axillse. 
(5) the mouth, particularly on the buccal mUcous membrane 
(in which lesions are found in approximately half the cases), 
lichen planus appears as opaline milky blue patches, or most 
often as a bluish-white reticulation, resembling the white 
streaks seen in the papules. (6) Rarely, in very acute attacks, 
blisters may develop in some of the papular lesions. (7) Scar- 
forming papules are also rare. (8) Annular lesions are com- 
paratively common. 

Configuration and Distribution . — ^The papules may be 
discrete and very widespreaMi, covering a large part of the 
surface, and in some parts confluent. The disease may, how- 
ever, be localised, e.g., to the buccal mucous membrane, to the 
genitalia, to the front of the wrists and forearms, to the lower 
extremities, or to a combination of a few or several of the above 
common localities. The papules may be arranged partly in 
rings ; one or more papiUes are frequently surrounded by a 
group of homy follicular papules (lichen plano-pilaris). The 
frme and other uncovered parte are generally spared, though 
not always, the lips being attacked with some ^quency, and 
the eyelids less often. Lichen planus is often disposed in 
streak along scratch marks. 

Symptoms . — ^There may be no subjective symptoms, but 
usuidly there is some irritation, and occasionally this is 
extremely severe. Patients are often unconscious of lichen 
planus in the mouth, but there is occasionally some soreness. 

Course and Prognosis . — ^The course is irr^ular but almost 
always slow. Acute widespread attacks are likely to come to 
an end sooner than those of limited distribution. Hypertrophic 
lichen planus may xiersist for many months or even years. 
Relapses may take place, but they are generally less widei^read 
and severe than the initial attack. 

Mtiology . — ^lichen planus is a disease of adults ; its cause 
is unknown. Nervous stress is often said to be one of the causal 
fEKtors, but the type of patient and the history do not idways 
confirm this belief. The not uncommon oocuraenoe of identi^ 
lesmns after the administration of organic arsenic or gold 



LICHEN PLANUS, LICHEN SIMPLEX, ETC, 1116 

would seem to suggest a toxic cause, but nothing is known 
of its nature or source. 

Treatment . — ^In the absence of a known cause there is no 
known rationed therapy. No local treatment except X-ray or 
Grenz-ray has any appreciable influence on lichen planus. 
Sedative applications may be used to allay itching when present. 
In acute attacks nothing is more effective than a period of 
complete rest. Severe itching in acute attacks is said to have 
been relieved on several occasions by lumbar puncture. Among 
empirical remedies that have achieved some success are mercury 
by mouth or by injection, arsenic (Acetylarsan, Enesol, Soamin), 
and vitamin B^. 

Lichen Planas«like Eruptions due to Gold or Arsenic. — The 

eruption may be purely of the lichen planus type, or it may be 
associated with erythrodermia ; sometimes it is seen when the 
latter begins to clear up, persisting for many months after aU 
exfoliation has come to an end. When gold has been the cause, 
the lichen pilaris type of element is often a pronounced feature. 
The outlook is satisfactory, though involution takes place very 
gradually. 

lichen Simplex Chroniens {Widal), Pruritus with Lichenifica- 
tion {Bloch ). — In the absence of any preceding cutaneous 
lesion, particularly eczema, lichenification (see p. 1096) may be 
provoked by repeated rubbing or scratching of a pniritic area. 
The most common sites are the nape and sides of the neck in 
women ; the inner aspect of the thighs, the scrotum, the 
extensor aspect of the forearms near the elbows, the legs and 
buttocks. The lesion is generally an infiltrated plaque, smooth 
and burnished by repeated rubbing, and quadrillated by 
accentuation of the normal skin folds. Sometimes, however, 
there may be discrete papules somewhat resembling those of 
lichen planiu but lacking the characteristic polygonal outline, 
bluish colour and Wickham’s striae. 

The chief causal factor appears to be nervous tension ; this 
is practically always present amd has to be taken into account 
when instituting treatment. The patients are often very 
responsive to small doses of superficial X-ray, to Grenz-ray or 
to Thorium X. Crude coal-tar, 10 per cent., in collodion and 
ether or White’s tar paste aue sometimes efficient remedies. 
Lichen simplex disappeaurs slowly when rubbing is prevented 
by an oodusive dresidng, e.g., Unna’s paste or several layers 
of Visoo-pauite bandaige. 

lAebenold Bniptioiui. — Jh. certain type of cutaneous eruption 
has been termed lichenoid, though unlikely to be confused 
with lichen plamus. The most importamt examples are the 



1116 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

lichenoid syphilide, tuberculide euid trichophytide. They have 
in common a localisation to the hair follicles and a disposition 
of the small acuminate papular lesions of which they are com- 
posed in irregular strands, patches, or even considerable areas, 
forming sometimes, by joining others, an irregular pattern ; 
the follicular papules are sometimes grouped round larger flat 
elements, an arrangement similar to that seen sometimes in 
lichen planus. 


THE ALOPECIAS 

The Alopecias may be divided into two clinical groups : 

1. Diffuse alopecias affecting the whole scalp. 

2. Alopecia in circumscribed patches. 

Diffuse Alopecias. — These are either symptomatic, develop- 
mental, or congenital. 

SympUmcUic alopecia follows an acute infection such as 
erysipelas, typhoid fever, or influenza, and occasionally un- 
complicated parturition. The hair begins to fall about six 
wee^ after the illness, continues to fall for about the same 
period, and finally it regrows gradually, but completely. 

The alopecia that occurs sometimes in secondary syphilis 
has a special character ; it is uneven, the scalp is riddled with 
clearings and irregular paths (alop^e en clairi^res). It also 
is temporary. 

Developmental Alopecia . — ^The common baldness of the 
male requires no description. It begins most often in middle 
life, but often prematuiuiy. It is gradually progressive, and 
no recovery is possible. Heredity is the chief factor ; that 
endocrine factors are also concerned in it is evident from the 
fact that it is not seen in women. Aristotle observed that 
children and eunuchs never became bald, and Sabouraud said 
that this observation had been confirmed by a careful examina- 
tion of the scalps of 350 Turkish eunuchs. 

In women, particulariy those with fine hair and an oily 
scalp, a gradually progressive loss of hair affecting principally 
the vertex, is not uncommon. It is accentuated at the meno- 
pause but, unlike the masculine type, it never becomes 
complete. As in masculine baldness here^'ty is an important 
fector. 

The rare congenital alopecias are three in number, known 
respectively as congenital ectodmmal defect, monilethrix, and 
pili torti. 



THE ALOPECIAS 1117 

Circamscribed Alopecias. — ^These may be divided into four 
groups : 

1. Those which follow pyogenic infections of the scalp, 
such as impetigo, boils, or kerion Celsi ; the hair usually regrows. 

2. Cicatrising alopecias. Apart from injuries and bums, 
permanent loss of hair with scarring may be the result of lupus 
er}rthematosus, lupus vulgaris, gumma, favus, radiodermatitis, 
scleroderma, lichen plano-pilaris, folliculitis decalvans, sycosis 
and pseudo -pelade. 

3. Trichorrhexis nodosa. The condition occurs in patches, 
the hair of which is fuzzy and broken off short, often close to 
the scalp. Fracture takes place at the site of tiny swellings 
which can be seen with a lens, and which imder the microscope 
are seen to resemble the partial fracture of a green stick. 
Sabouraud compared the condition to that of old shaving 
and other brushes, and believed hair waving or dyeing, or the 
excessive use of shampoos, to be responsible ; but it often 
persists for years in spite of the strict avoidance of such causes. 
Rarely the hair becomes normal within a year or two. 

No treatment appears to be of any value. 

4. Traumatic alopecias. A patch of baldness corresponding 
to the part of the head in contact with the pillow is often seen 
in infants. The hair is rubbed away by constant rolling of the 
head on the pillow. 

Famae Pelades. — Patchy alopecias have been observed in 
epidemic form among children in institutions. They are 
thought to have been due to rubbing. The starting point has 
sometimes been the presence among the children of a case of 
alopecia areata. 

TrichiiiUomania. — This is met with most often in children, 
and it is a symptom of restlessness like nail-biting. The child 
develops the habit of twisting or pulling the hair, which he 
pulls out or breaks off close to the scalp. The diagnosis is made 
by the discovery of broken hairs of different lengths. 

Alopecia Areata* — The condition may consist of: (1) 
circumscribed patches of roughly circular outline ; (2) large 
irregular patches ; (3) complete loss of hair, sometimes involving 
the whole surface. 

Sympioms . — The fall of hair is preceded by faint erythema 
of a salmon-pink colour, without subjective symptoms. As a 
rule the alopecia which follows is complete, but scattered hairs 
of normal length are occasionally seen in the patch ; these 
yield, however, to the slightest traction. In addition a number 
of short broken hairs are usually present ; these are broader 
and pigmented at their free extremities, while the roots are 



1118 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


depigmented and atrophied. The presence of these hairs, which 
are l^own as exclamation mark hairs, indicates that the process 
is spreading actively. 

Alopecia areata varies greatly in extent and duration. 
Cases in which only a few sm^ patches are present may recover 
in some months. Widespread cases are more persistent, though 
the majority recover eventually. Those in which all the hair 
is lost may not recover, or partial or complete recovery is 
followed often by relapse from which no recovery is to be 
expected. R^rowth begins in the form of downy hair, which 
eventually becomes replaced by fully developed hair ; this 
may be white at first but it usually bewmes pigmented later. 

Etiology . — Very little is known about the cause of this 
common condition. Heredity plays a part in a small percentage 
of the cases. Like vitiligo, with which it is rather rarely 
associated, it is believed to be the result of a functional dis- 
turbance of the sympathetic nervous supply of the skin or hair. 
A direct injury to the head has preced^ certain cases. 

The widespread belief that nervous stress or shock are 
common causal factors is only occasionally supported by the 
case histories. Alox)ecia areata occurs rarely in the course of 
Graves’ disease. 

There is no known rational treatment. It is customary to 
apply stimulating lotions or ultra-violet light in erythema doses. 


SCLERODERMA AND DERMATOMYOSITIS 

SclerodemuL — ^There are two main types : 

1. Generalised, or progressive symmetrical scleroderma. 

2. Circumscribed sclei^erma, or morphoea. 

Generalised Scleroderma. — ^The disease opens fi^equently with 
Reynand’s phenomenon, and this may precede other changes 
by weeks or months. The next ph^ is commonly one of 
o^ema ; the face, hands, and forearms are first attacked, 
oedema is replaced by sderosis, sometimes so soperfidal that 
it can hardly be appreciated, sometimes dense enough to impede 
movements of the arms, fingers, and legs ; inability to extend 
the fingers frilly, a oluu^ spoken of as solmodactyly, is par- 
ticularly common. In the fully developed disease the sites of 
election are the face, the neck, and the adjoining parts of the 
chest and back ; tlm fingers, hands and forearms, and the feet 
and logs. It may be almost universal. 

The face has a peculiar and quite characteristic made. The 



SCtJJRODERMA AlfD DERMATOMYOSITIS 1119 

lips are thin and drawn over the teeth, the nose is pinched, the 
forehead devoid of wrinkles. Small telangiectatic tufts are 
present on the cheeks. 

Skeletal myopathy is constant, and it is independent of 
overlying scleroderma ; it varies from slight myasthenia, 
accompanied usually by some pain, to extreme weakness and 
atrophy with dysphagia and nasal speech ; in such cases 
respiration eventually becomes impeded owing to involvement 
of the respiratory muscles. 

Pathology . — ^The connective bundles of the skin lose their 
fibrillary structure, becoming condensed and homogeneous. 
In the muscles the change is that of a degenerative myopathy ; 
it occurs in patches and varies from loss of striation to complete 
disintegration. 

The thyroid gland is involved in the process, the changes 
' varying from that of a colloid goitre with increase of stroma in 
an early case, to atrophy and fibrosis after many years. Other 
endocrine glands do not appear to undergo any gross anatomical 
change. Calciiuu is sometimes deposited in the skin, and 
osteoporosis is found occasionally. Cheatinuria is constant. 

JEtiology , — The disease may occur at any age, but adults 
are more often attacked than children ; two congenital cases 
have been recorded. The significance of the changes found 
in the skin, blood vessels, muscles, and thyroid gland is 
unknown. 

Prognosis . — Severely myasthenic cases may be fatal within 
a year, death is generally due to broncho-pneumonia ; the 
majority persist for years without much change ; a smaU 
number recover spontsineously. 

There is no known rational treatment. 

Cironmscribed Sderoderms (Morphoea). — This begins with a 
violaceous erythematous plaque ; it extends gradually, becom- 
ing ivory white in the centre and indurated. The plaque is 
bordered by a violaceous zone, often spoken of as the Idac ring ; 
this marks the zone of extoosion of the process. There may be 
one or several patches of variable dimensions and shape. The 
process comes to an end in the course of several months or 
years, and is replaced by atrophy, often pigmented. 

Mtiology . — ^little or nothing is known of the cause of 
droumscrib^ scleroderma; it has occurred occasionally in 
cases of Graves* disease. Whether it is related or not to 
grawralised sderoderma is unknown. 

Tfeolnisnl.— There is no satisfactory treatment ; definite 
improvement is, howevwr, said to follow the application of 
Tlmrium X ointment. 



1120 


COMMON DISEASES OP THE SKIN 


DERMATOMYOSmS 

The opening cutaneous symptoms vary in degree. There 
may he erythema and oedema of the face and eyehds ; more 
often the face, neck, and chest and the extremities are involved, 
and occasionally there is extreme oedema of imiversal distribu- 
tion. This phase may persist with fluctuations for months, 
often accompanied by intermittent fever. With gradual 
subsidence of the oedema, the skin becomes the seat of variegated 
change, consisting of telangiectases, pigmentation, depigmenta- 
tion, superficial roughness, and very superficial sclerosis or 
atrophy. 

At this stage the sites of election are the face, the scalp 
with gradual loss of hair, the neck and the adjoining parts of 
the chest, back and shoulders, the backs of the fingers and 
hands, and the forearms and arms, especially along their 
extensor aspects ; the legs and thighs may also be attacked, 
and there may also be areas of the same change of the lower 
part of the abdomen and back. In exceptional cases the skin 
changes are limited to the face and hands, and they may be 
quite insignificant, the case presenting then the picture of an 
almost pure myopathy. 

Muscular Symptoms . — Weakness accompanied usually by 
dull pain may begin almost at once, or it may not be noticed 
for several weeks or months. It varies from fatigue, or inability 
to get up easily from a low chair, to extreme pro.stration with 
dysphagia and nasal speech. In time the muscles become 
wasted, abnormally firm in consistency, and retracted, so the 
arms cannot be fully extended. 

Prognosis . — Severe oases are sometimes fatal within a few 
months, others pursue a smouldering oourse for years, and 
some recover completely. Death is most often due to broncho- 
pneumonia. 

Pathciogy . — In the skin superficial sclerosis is found. In 
the musdes the change is the same as that found in progressive 
scleroderma. Creatinuria is constant. Exceptionally there are 
deposits of caldum in the skin, and osteoporosis has also been 
seen. 

Etiology . — The disease is more common than is usually 
supposed. It 000018 at all ages, though young adults are the 
most frequent viotims. That dermatomyositis and progressive 
scleroderma repreemt, as Langmead and others have pointed 
out, difEerent aspects of a common morbid process is evident 
from the close similarity of the symptoms and pathology of the 



DISEASES DUE TO FILTERABLE VIRUSES 1121 

two conditions, as well as from the fact that every possible 
grade of transition between them has been seen. 

Treatment . — Complete rest is necessary until definite im- 
provement has become manifest. There is no known curative 
remedy. In chronic cases physical effort shotdd be restricted to 
that which can be accomphshed without distress, generally very 
little. Improvement may set in even after years of weakness. 


DISEASES DUE TO FILTERABLE VIRUSES 

Four conditions are known to be caused by filter-passing 
viruses ; they are Herpes Zoster, Herpes Simplex, Verruca, 
and Molluscum Contagiosum. Herpes zoster has been described 
elsewhere {vide p. 855). 

Herpes Simplex. — Sym'ploms. — ^The lesion consists usually 
of a single group of vesicles, but there may be two or several 
groups, often disposed symmetrically. The vesicles dry up 
in the course of four or five dajrs, leaving a crust which separates 
several days later. Herpes occurs most often on the face, 
especially about the mouth, and on the genitalia ; but any 
part may be attacked, including the buccal and urethral mucous 
membranes. There is a mark^ tendency to recurrence, often 
at regular intervals, and in the same place. 

jEticdogy . — ^Herpes ocoxirs at all ages frem childhood 
onwards ; it has been transmitted from man to man with some 
difiScxdty, and from man to the rabbit with great ease. It may 
occur in the course of almost any fever and in coryza, but 
often independently of any other infection. Its cause is a 
filterable virus, idmitical with that of herpetic encephalitis in 
rabbits. 

Treatment. — ^The application between attacks of two or 
three small doses of X-ray to the site of infection is sometimes 
followed by an unusually long period of freedom. The lesion 
itself is bec^ treated by the application of a bland powder. 

VsmiM. — Warts are hard epithelial elevations ; they have 
a rough, homy, papuliferous surface, and they are usuaUy of a 
gte 3 riBh colour. They vary in dimensions and in degree of 
devation. They may' be flat as in the variety known as juvenUe 
warts, raised and sesi^ in verruca vulgaris, filiform or p^^cu- 
lated, or they may be to some extent embedded in the skdn, as 
in the |Uantar and palmar types. Plantar and palmar warts 
are less raised than warts erf similar size in other parts ; rfiey 
bear some resembkmoe to corns, from which they can be <^- 
tinguished as a rule by the jwefwnce of a slight crater-like 

71 



im COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

central deiHeasion. They are oeariy always painM and intorfins 
with walking. Warts are often present on the nail Mds, 
extending occasionally boieatii the nail to the nail bed. 

— A wart is essentially an epithelial hypwplsaia ; 
<he stimulus is a filterable virus. Warts are auto-inooolable 
and slightly in&ctiouB ; small epidemics, especially of plantar 
warts, are not unconunon in boarding schools. 

Treatment. — For the common wart freezing with carbon 
dioxide snow is the most useful all-roimd remedy. A little 
acetone is added to the powdered “ snow ’* to nu^ a mush, 
and this is applied with a camel’s hair paintbrush ; each wart 
most be kept frozen for at least two or three minutes. I<arge 
warts genei^y require several treatments at intervals of about 
a fortnight. 

Flat warts require fioezing for five or ten seconds only ; 
or they may be treated by t^ applioaiioa of l^rium X, or 
trichloraoetic acid, or by gentle fulguration. 

I^antar warts are best treated by the single apphcation of a 
large dose of X-ray, the sorroundi^ skin being wdl scremied 
with lead foil ; altematively, aft» curetting the wart out of 
its bed with a sharp spoon, the cavity is touched with the 
cautery or fulgurated. 

Paronychial warts are difficult to treat when partly situated 
under the nail. This makes necessary removal of the xuul, or 
part of it, before treating the wart by freezing or curetting. 

Warts, fortunatdy, have a tendency to disappear spon- 
taneously, and this happens occasionally when one or two of a 
considerable number have been disposed of by treatment. 

Molhiscnm Coatagiotnm. — ^This iK>t uncommon (xmditiim is 
seen most often in children. The lesions consist of epithelial 
tumours which vary in size from a pin’s head to a pea. At 
first barely perceptible, they enlarge slowly to fimn round 
tumours resembling peaiis. Eadi fom a shallow omitral nm- 
foilication through wUch a meamy mass can be ezpresaed by 
lateral compression. 

This materia is found on microscopic examination to 
ccmtain lai^ round or ovoid ^ntbelial dmhents without 
nuclei, known as moUnsoam bodiee. and a quantity of amor- 
phous debris. Then may be from a fow lesions to hundreds, 
some only to hr seen wihh a kna. 

Secondary infeotioB of the burger dements is amaincm. 

JBli(Ai0if.—Uolbtmcnm oooiofpoam is botib contagious and 
auto-inoc&rbfe. It is most often seen in rammer, and s^rineuning 
bathsaxefMobablytliecliiefeouroeofin&etimi. ltis,fiksvemiQa, 
an e^thdial tumour, and tiie stunulue is a filtoable dras. 



DISEASES DUE TO FUNOI 1123 

Treat/nMnt. ^Eaoh letdon ia treated separately ; the central 
soft portion u e&preased, and a pointed match moistened with 
pure carbolic amd or tincture of iodine ia inserted into the 
opening. They may also be treated by electro-coagulation. 


DISEASES DUE TO FUNGI 

The group of diseases caused by fungi is one of the most 
important in dermatology. Although many types of fungi 
occur in nature, only a few are parasitic on man, and these 
beldng to a (daes wUch from their extremely simple mode of 
existence are known as the fungi imperfeoti. These consist of 
round or oval spores, which axe concerned with reproduction, 
and protoplasmic filaments known as h3^hse ; a mass of 
hyifiuB is termed mycelium. 

Tbme are three importemt groups of pathogenic fungi : — 

1. The ringworm fimgi. 

2. A group of fungi resembling yeasts, of which the thrush 
fungus, oospora albicans, monilia Pinoyi, and the pityrosporon, 
are example. 

3. Nocardiffi or streptothricea, of which aotinomyoes {vide 
p. 90) ia the most important member. 

Thb Rtnowokm Infbcjtions 

The ringworm fiingi grow on the skin and {nroduoe five 
types of reaction : — 

1. Some attack chiefly the homy layer, with the production 
of scaly lesions ; also they attack the h^, which is a specialised 
portion of this layer. 

2. The epideenm may be attacked with the production of 
vesicular leskms. 

3. Some of the ringworm fungi excite a pustular reaction in 
the skin, psrtiouiarly tiiose whi^ are pathc^nio on animals, 
tjg., oats, dogs, horses, and cattle. 

4. The i^per portion of the skin may be attacked with 
the pEodnetion of granulomatoos lesions. 

0. Eozemstoos Jerirms may be produced. 

Biiifirann Inteettons ot the Olsbrous Skin.— These may 
podttce the following varieties of lesion : — 

1. Sealif Maetdar Type. — A pmk scaly macule is the 

iithisl les^ whidh spread periifimrally by a ali^tly r^sed 
and erythematous edge and involuteB in the oentre, 

which remains scaly. 



1124 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

2. Papular Type . — ^The lecdon begins uid spreads in the 
same manner as the maoular form, but there is more infiltration. 
Owing to the oentanfiigal spread, which is not qxute regular, 
figures with polyoydio outlines are sometimes produced ; 
sometimes one figure is seen within another. 

3. Vesicular Type. — The lesions begin sometimes with 
papules, sometimes with vesicles. They spread peripherally 
from t^ central focus, involute centrally to some extent, 
and leave behind furfiiraoeous scales and sometimes crusts 
of dried serum. The vesicles rest upon a reddened, often 
infiltrated base. 

4. Pustular Type . — ^The lesions begin as dull red papules 
which soon become pustules. They spread periphei^y to 
form a solid elevated disc or plaque, round, oval, or insular 
in outlme, and tend to dear up partially in the centre. 

6. OranvlomaUms Type . — ^The infection is. usually derived 
from cattle ; the beard in man is most commonly attacked and 
occasionally the scalp in children. The lesions are circum- 
scribed indolent tumour-like nodules or plaques involving both 
the subcutaneous tissue and the skin. 

6. Eczematous Type . — ^Eozematoid ringworm, indistinguish- 
able from eczema, occurs on the dorsum of the hands and 
feet, about the ankles, wrists, elbows, and in other places. 
Such cases may be due to one or other of the triohoph 3 rta, 
but eczematoid lesions are more conunonly produced by a 
particular orguiism, namely, the EpidermophyUm inguinale. 

Biddsmiopliytosis. — ^The causative organism, the Epidermo- 
phyUm inguinale, is of tropical origin. It is believed to have 
bera intr^uced into England by schoolboys sent to English 
public schools from the East. It has become thorou^y 
established in the public schools, and is also to be found in 
swimming baths, Turkish baths, clubs, hotels, and similar 
institutions. The disease appmrs to be increasing in England. 
The fringuB grows best in the presence of warmth and moisture 
and it finds tiiese conditions especially in the inguinoorural 
r^ions, the axilhe, and the interdigital folds of the feet. There 
are five dinioal forms of epidermophytosis. 

(a) The Macular Form {Dhobie Itch) attacks chiefly the 
upper inner th^ ; both tiiighs are usually affected, the left 
more often tium the ri^^ owing to the contiguity of the 
scrotum. The hMufm sppeads frr^ the initial focus in all 
directions, but itiops short as a rule below, at about tiie level 
of the scrotum, tihon^^ in exceptional cases it may descend 
down tike thig^ as far as the knee. It may invade the 
perineum and tiie intwgluteid fold, but almost always spares 



RINGWORM INFECTIONS 1125 

ihe inguinoorural fold. The sorotum may be attacked with the 
production of superficial redness, or raw, moist patches ; the 
pubes, axillse, umbilicus, and submammary folds are often 
affected, but never the hair. Scattered patches, round and 
sometimes ringed, are occasionally found on the surface 
generally. 

The lesions are irritable, red, scaly, and sharply outlined. 
There is less tendency to central clearing than in other forms of 
ringworm infection. 

(6) Vtoicula/r or Dyaidrosiform. — ^This variety may be 
oUnioally identical with the condition known as dysidrosis or 
oheiropompholyx ; the palms, soles, and lateral aspects of 
the fingers and toes are mainly affected. 

(c) Macerated Form. — The spaces between fingers and toes 
are attacked, especially the latter. The fourth interdigital 
cleft is always affect^ owing to its greater depth. The 
epidermis is tUokened, sodden, and tough, and can be detached 
only with difiBiculty from an underlying raw surface. The 
periphery of the lesion presents vesicles, or the epidermis may 
be undermined with a ragged free edge directed tow8u*ds the 
centre. 

(d) Fissured Form. — ^This form is often associated with the 
preceding. The natural skin folds running transversely across 
the under surface of the base of the toes are frequent sites. 

(e) HyperkercUotic Form. — ^The soles of the feet are affected, 
less often the palms, the homy layer being thickened and 
scaly ; there is no clear demarcation of the affected portion 
from the healthy skin. 

Ringworm oi the Hails. — ^Whatever type of ringworm 
infection is the cause, the nail lesions are always similar. 
The usual changes are thickening, with friability, vertical 
striation, and separation of the nail from the nail-bed. 

Erythrasma. — This Condition, though not related to the 
epidmmophyton infections, is also found in the inguinocrural 
region and the axilhe. It consists of well-defined, clearly 
oiroumscribed, reddish-yellow patches with furfuraceous scales 
which do not it<di. The cause is the Microsporon minutisaimum. 

Pityriasis Versiw>lof. — ^AlUiough usually included in ri^- 
worm infections, this diseaBe f^ls more naturally into line 
witii the group of epidermal fungus infections caused by 
organisms resembling yeast, such as thruA, monilia and 
pityrosponm infections. The causal organism, Mtcroaporon 
fttifnr, has a f^edileotiion for covered parts. It affects chMy 
the ebMiti abdomen, back, and shoulders, and is most oomm<^y 
fbimd in subjects with an active sweat and sebaceous secretion. 



1126 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


The disease ooosiste of irregular macular light htoum areas, 
which at first sight do not alwa3rB look scaly, but on g«itly 
scraping they are easily seen to be so. The ftafaraceous scales 
can .be easily detach^, and on microscopic examination in 
liquor potassse the fungi are readily semi as grape-like clusters 
of {qmres disposed about short strips of mycelium. 

Bingwonn <rf the Scalp. — ^The scalp is very rarely infected 
with ringwcnrm in sidult life, but it is common at all ages up 
to puberty. The commonest cause is a small spared fungus 
of human origin, Mieroaporon Audouini. Oooatioxially the 
infection is derived from animals, in^ which case the frmgos 
may be a small spored species, or more occasionally large 
spored. 

Mieroaporon Avdouini Infection of the Scalp. — ^The homy 
layer of the epidermis of the scalp is first attacked with the 
ptoduction of a round or iir^ular scaly patch. The infection 
then spreads downwards into the follicle endroling the hair. 
Just above the hair bulb the cuticle becomes frrayed, and allows 
the myedinm to penetrate the htir. The myedium then 
works upward beneath the cuticle, and for a short distance 
downwa^, but never reaching the bulb. From the subcutioalar 
layer of mycelium, spores are produced which penetrate the 
hair and coalesce to form a mosaic of spores. This extends 
upwards beyond the intrafoilicular portion of the hair. The 
hair is imidmed brittle, and usually Ineaks a few miUimetres 
or more above the surface of the scalp. As the bulb is not 
infected the hair continues to grow and to break off. 

Clinically tinea capitia, as this condition is known, can be 
recognised by the presence of scaly patches with todten lustre- 
leas hairs, the normal directions which are not followed. 
In addition tiiere is often aoomnpanying erection of the feUides. 
In some cases there is a moderate degree of inflammatory 
diange in the form of superficial folhoular postulation. This 
is eanmum in infections of animal origin. A special variety 
of postnlar ringworm of tbe scalp, k^wn as Kerion Odai, 
mvades the hdr follides nuae d^ly. It gives rise to one 
or more raised disc-like gramtlomirt^ plaques firom whidi 
tile hairs, loosened by snppiiration, are eventui^ shed 
qpontaneoia^. Another spe^ variety in which the infected 
luuia break off floali with ^ sca^ appearing in the fram 
tiny black dots, is known as Uaok doA ; 

MkrcMporcm infeetion the scalp may be detected by 
Wood’s fUnminntion. If tite light from a merotny ntyovr 
laaoqi is passed tiurong^ nickel oxide f^ass, the himluoiis layS 
aseent^ H the io^p is vfewed in a dark lookn under m 



RINGWORM INFECTIONS - 


1127 


rays that pam, hairs infected with microsporon fluoresce a 
bright green ct^ur. In this way a single infected hair can be 
detected ; it is thus a valuable test of cure, as well as a simple 
method of diagooris. Black dot ringworm does not fluoresce. 

Biltfwom ol the Beard (Tinea Sycosis) may occur in two 
forms, a superficial variety which may be macular, papulo- 
vesicular or pustular, or a suppurating grsmtdomatous type 
resembling kerion of the scalp. The lesions of the latter type 
are discrete boggy swellings ; the foUicles may be convert^ 
into wells of pus, or suppuration may be hardly apparent, 
though it is always possible to express droplets of pus from 
the follicles. The hahn are easUy extracted with forceps, and 
in the course of weeks or a few months are spontaneously 
shed. 

Trichophytides. — ^Tbe suppurative varieties of ringworm 
infection are occasionally oompiioated by eruptions of 
generalised distribution. These appear some weeks after the 
onset of the infection and uanally when the initial lesions are 
b^puiing to involute. The commonest variety is that known 
as lichen Triehophyticns ; usually complicating Kerion Gebi 
in children, this consists of small acuminate follicular papules, 
often capped by a filifcmn homy spine, occurring chiefly in 
groups on the trunk and limbs ; tl^ eraption b^rs a close 
resemblance to lidhen Sorofulosorum. Ei^hema multiforme 
or nriacaiia complicating deep ringworm infection or epidermo- 
phytosis are less common forms of trichophytide. 

The trichophytides are due botii to the absorption of 
triohophytio toxin firom the initial focus, to which the individual 
becomes sensitised, and to the dissemination in the blood 
stceam of living fungi. 


Tbeatmsnt 

Ringworm Inlsotfons of tbs CMateons (non-hairjr) Skin. — ^The 
maoular, papular, vesicalar, and pustular forms are easily cured 
by ^ apfdication of ^otare of io^e or Whitfield’s benzoic 
add oi ntm e nt (vide Therapeutic Section). Mild mercurial 
ohotments ue effloaoious. Whitfield’s ointment is pu- 
tieularly suitable for the macular form of epidermophytosis. 
13ie radier rare granulomatous forms are best treat^ by 
menmry perdilorhfe fomentations of 1 : 4,000 strength. 

In lesiitant eases a mixture containii^ 16-30 gr. of 
potasdum iodide, or 6-10 mimms (d* 10 per cent, tincture of 
iodiiM, should be given by mouth three times daily. 

The Iniisidlgital varMy of efudermoifliytods of die feet 



1128 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

often requires {oolonged and energetic treatment. When the 
intordigital spaces are lined tough, sodden epidermis it 
is best to remove this to begin with by means of a 12 per cent, 
solution of salicylic acid in spirit. This should be applied 
each night imtil all or the greater part of the homy material 
has been removed. A Aingicide paint, such as the carltel fiiohsin 
paint advised by A. Ciwtella^, or duysarobin paint (vide 
Therapeutic Section) may then be applied twice daily. 

For the vesicular eruption of the feet and hands Whitfield’s 
ointment or a fungicide paint may be applied once or twice 
daily after bathing the feet in eusol for about ten minutes. 

In oases of recent origin in which homy accumulation in 
the spaces is not pronounced a lees concentrated solution of 
salicylic acid in spirit, or one containing salicylic acid and 
benzoic acid [vide Therapeutic Section), may be used in the 
preliminary stage of treatment. 

Ringworm of the Nails. — Complete removal of the nail 
and curettage of all infected homy tissue may effect a cure. 
This must ^ followed by ixeatment with a strong fungicide 
preparation, such as 4 per cent, chrysarobin ointment, imtil 
a new healthy nail has grown. When recurrences occur in 
spite of the above treatment the infection can only be eradicated 
by operative removal of the nail matrix-. 

Ringworm of the Beard. — ^For superficial infections a 
fungicide ointment w rapidly effective. The granulomatous 
kerion-like lesions detur up gi^uaUy with mercury perohloride 
fomentations of 1 : 4,000 strength. 

Ringworm of the Sealp. — ^Witii the exception of Kerion 
Celsi, in which the hair is loosened by peripheral suppuration 
and spontaneously shed, and which is easily cured by local 
fungicide applications or by mercury perohloride fomentations, 
it is necessary first to epilate the hair before appl 3 ring a 
fungicide remii^y. Epilation may be accomplish^ (a) by 
the aitifidal production of foUicular pnstulafaon ; (6) by X-ray. 

The first method of treatment may be carried out by shaving 
the scalp, carefully outlining the infected patdies, and painting 
these areas daify with ooton oil for twelve to fourteen daya. 
By this means a condition resembling kerum may be product, 
a^ in sndi a oase the teeatn^t will be suooessM, for the hair 
will in time be shed spontaneonsly. M<ne often, however, 
snperfidal fiifiliciilar postulation results, which, while loosening 
the hiun somewhat, will neoesntate th^ oan^ removal with 
finrc^. This proceieding is extremely difficult and tedious. 

X^pflaflon by X-ray is the most satisfactory nwtiiod of 
treating ringwcmn <d the soalp. A singto epilating dose is 



DERMATOSES CAUSED BY ANIMAL PARASITES 1129 

given, and the whole scalp treated. The hair falls out in 
nineteen to twenty-one days, and it is not difficult to cure 
what has now become ringworm of a non-hairy surface. Un- 
fortunately, thrae is a risk of some degree of permanent alopecia, 
though when the treatment is carried out by an expert the 
danger is very small. 


DERMATOSES CAUSED BY ANIMAL PARASITES 

Several insects and acari are able to Uve on the human skin 
and cause characteristic eruptions. The most important of 
these are the Pediculi (P. capitis, P. pubis, and P. vesti- 
mentorum), fmd the Acarus Sarcoptes scabiei hominis, responsible 
for scabies. 

Pedicuxosis 

There are marked differences in the size and shape of these 
insects, by which they may be easily identified firom one another. 
The body louse is the hurgest, the pubic the smallest ; the 
latter is broader in proportion to its length than the other two. 
Pediculi are provided with a pyriform head containing two jaws 
by which the skin is grasped, and a sucking organ. The 
females are more numerous than the males ; they lay large 
numbers of eggs provided with a ohitinous envelope. These 
are found attached by a pedicle to the hair in the scalp and 
the pubic varieties, and in the clothing and on lanugo hairs 
in t^ case of the body louse. The eggs hatch out within a 
week, and they are mature in a fortnight. Multiplication, 
therefore, takes place at an enormous rate. 

Psdieolosis Oai^tis. — ^The insect lives chiefly in the scalp of 
children, but is quite commoDly found in women. It appears 
less often in men, because the ova are not easily dei>osit^ on 
short hairs. The lesions produced by the presence of P. 
ctmntis vary within wide limits according to the susceptibility 
of the individual. Some persons ate able to harbour enormous 
numbers of the insect without symptoms, but in others ^e 
irritation set up by the bites pauses eruptions of varying 
sevwity, with more or lees severe py<^nio i^eotion. Pyoder- 
matitis may be in the form of impetigo or a pustular follioulitis, 
and it may be aoocnnpanied by abscesses of the scalp. In 
severe oasM the hair may be matted toother by c^ts of dried 
SMTum which overlie a scalp bathed in pus (Plica pbUmiea) 
In auoh eases, as well as in milder ones, the pyodermatito 
e xt ends sometimes to tiite poet-auricular grooves, the 



1130 OOMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

shouMen, and uppw part of the ba*^. Idnear eoratdi marics, 
exooriationa, and pyodermatitis may be preamit in these regkms 
also without lesions in the soalp, owing to tiie fact that the 
pediooli aie able to leave ^e soalp for finding porposee, 
not for propagation. Seriboa sequeln of Pedicuiciis capitis are 
often met with in the fcmn of impetiginons dermatitis and 
duonio foUioulitis of the soalp, blepharitis, and post-anrioular 
impetiginous eczema. The glan^ in the neck may be 
seoondSirily enhurged. 

Pediculosis Corporis. — ^The body louse is larger than the 
head loose, and lives on the non-hairy parts of the skin, while 
the ova are depodted diiefly in tiie seams of tiie olothM, hot 
are found also attached to lanugo hairs. The type and degree 
of tiie eruption varies with the sosoeptibility of tiie individual. 
Infestation with body lice is almost invariably associated with 
conditions that necessitate sleeping in day clothes ; hence it 
is met with chiefly in the destitute, particularly the aged, and 
in soldiers on active service. The lesions are found in places 
where the clothes ate in dose contact with the skin, such as 
the shoulders, scapular regions, the posterior axillary folds, 
the abdomen, and the anterior aspects of the thighs. The fore- 
arms and hands, legs and feet are rarely attacked. The bite 
of the insect causes ^ urticarial wheal of more or less intensity. 
Linear excoriations caused by soratdiing are also present. 
Pigmented patches are found in prolonged cases, and in the 
most severe forms the skin may become thickened from incessant 
scratching, and almost unftbrmly pigmented. Sometimes 
pigment may be found in the buccal mucous membruie. A 
certain degree of debilii7 aocompaniee PedicvJosis corporis in 
some cases, and is attributed to a toxin introduced by the 
insect. The pigmentation is believed to be of like ^gin. 
Pedieuii corporis are responsible for the truumussion of ^^hus. 

Pedlealotis PuMs. — P. pubis, or the erab louse, lives on the 
pubic rpgiim, but invades the nei^bouring portion of tiie 
tilths sod abdomen as wdL The axillary hairs, eyeb ro ws, 
and eydadies are oooaasonafly invaded, partieuhriy in aged 
snbjeets. Infiaetion is generally thot^ not ahra^ aequbed 
throui^ sexual interoourse. T^ insect is provided with daws 
by whioh it is able to gn^ a hair. It faioda by plunging its 
hi^ into the ttoutit of the foiMole bearing the hi^ to wh^ 
itisatiadied. The ova are fimnd aMad&sd to the hi^ doae 
tothdrbases. The biles giro ihM to ruoro or leas sevwMritohhig, 
and oftsn a fbUteoiar poitnlar emptimi on the pubes, tamer 
aiqpeota of tbs tbil^ and lower {Kwtion of tbs abdomm. In 
additkm, pigmemad patehse of a peoidiar datahUve eeionr 



SCABIES 1131 

axe sometimes found cm the abdomen or thighs. These ate 
jMitiiognomcmio of the disease. 

Treatment . — Pedievkma Capitis . — A close hairoat is nata* 
rally the simplest way of onring the condition. It is necessary 
in oases oompHoated by severe pyogenic infection ; for female 
ehildien and women, however, this drastic remedy is undesirable. 
As the result of trials on a large scale during the present war, 
an oily preparation known as lethane oil has been found to 
be extremely efficient for the treatment of head lice (see Thera- 
peutic Index). After a preliminary shampoo with soft soap 
and borax (borax, 1 oz. ; soft soap, ^ lb. ; hot water, 1 quart), 
followed by drying, the oil is appli^ out of a dropper in the 
scalp along partings, four on each side of the head ; it is then 
gently massaged over the scalp with the tips of the fingers to 
ensure even distribution. The hair should not be washed for 
a week. The single application is said to kill all lice and nits ; 
the latter may Iw combed out if desired after a shampoo at 
the end of treatment with a fine metal comb. 

Pediculosis Corporis . — Sterilisation of all clothes and bed- 
clothes is all that is necessary to get rid of body lice. 

Pediculosis Pubis . — ^The affected hair should be shaved. 
Lethane oil or benzyl benzoate cream may be applied in pre- 
ference to the still widely used mercury ointment, which has 
pcpnonnoed irritating properties. 

Scabies 

This common paraaitio disease is caused by an acarus, 
Sareoptes scabiei bominis. The female penetrates the epidermis 
and burrows immediately beneath the homy layer, depositing 
ova in her pr og res s . The presence of the parasite gives rise to 
a vende of about the size of a pin’s head or larger, in which 
tile aoaros can sometimw be seen as a tiny white spot. 
Buns only occur in certain sites of predilection. These are 
about tile wrists, and particularly the ulnar margin, the inter- 
digital folds, sidM of the fingers, the^ulnar margin of the hand, 
the axillaxy folds, the penis and scrotum, the ankfos and sides 
of the fixt. Li diildien bunows are also found on the palms 
and adee. The ova hatch out in 60 to 100 hours or longer ; 
the larval puasite makes its own burrow, which is said to be 
marked by a vesiols; succeeding stages, n 3 nnph and adult 
male, nym|di and immature fomale, also burrow and probably 
wander as well, but the mature female, having made hw burrow 
(th» run) does not move fimn it. 

ICati^ty is readied in eight days or longer ficom the laying 



1132 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

of the egg. At 13° C. mites may survive for as long as fourteen 
days away from their host, but not longer than forty-eight 
hours at higher or lower temperatures. The lesions of scabies 
are of three types : (1) runs consisting of dirty greyish lines, 
straight or sinuous, and usually lees than ^ cm. long, terminated 
by a vesicle containing the female parasite ; (2) vesicles ; (3) 
papular lesions. The last two are found on the hands, fingers 
and wrists, the feet, the l^s and forearms, the sides of the 
chest, the abdomen, the inner aspects of the thighs and the 
genitals, and in the natal clefts. They occur in greatest numbers 
in the immediate neighbourhood of the breeding grounds, 
becoming more sparse in the intervening areas. A group of 
papules on the point of one or both elbows is almost always 
present in well-develo{)ed cases. The face and sctdp are always 
spared, and the neck is hardly affected. The back also is 
attacked to a minor d^ree, or not at all. 

The distribution of the lesions contrasts with that of 
Pediculosis corporis. The eruption itches intensely, especially 
in bed, and causes much scratching. Accessory lesions in the 
form of linear excoriations, pyodermia and traumatic eczema 
are common. Scabies is the most frequent cause of eczema of 
the nipple in women. Unfortunately both complications may 
be very troublesome, as experience during the present war has 
shown. In babies and young children scabetio lesions on tb^ 
wrists, hands, and fingers are generally far more numerous than 
in adults, and a severe pyodermia of the hands is not uncommon. 
This infection and the eczematisation which may accompany it 
add considerably to difficulties in treatmmit. In adults also, 
particularly those with fisur senative skins, infection and eczema 
may mask the underlying scabies. 

According to L. lifellanby, scabies is probably transmitted 
almost entirely by skin contact. He tried to infest volunteers 
through clothes and bedding. With bedding he failed alto- 
gether ; and of thirty-two who wore clothes immediately aft«r 
they had bear worn by scabetio patients, only two subsequently 
developed scabies ; with longer intervak no infestation took 
place. Three out of four vohmteen who slept with scabetio 
patients became infested, the emliest lesions appearing from 
eight to twelve days latw. He found that no complaint of 
itching may be made for six or seven weeks. 

TrecUmerU consists of the thorough application of one of 
several remedies {vide p. 1137), of whitffi becayl benzoate i^>pears 
to be aooepted at pressnt as probably the most effldent. A 
bath is ts)^, the patient oovo^ with soA soap and sonabbed ; 
immediately after bath, a mixture of benzjd benzoate, soft 



EXTERNAL TREATMENT - 1133 

soap and spirit in equal parts is brushed on all over from the 
neci: downwards. This gives rise to stinging, which, however, 
passes off in about half an hour. Two or three such treatments 
are generally enough. Or a cream containing 26 per cent, of 
benzyl benzoate may be rubbed in by hand (see Therapeutic 
Index). When an ointment is used the treatment is a little 
more prolonged. After the preliminary hot bath and scrubbing, 
the ointment is rubbed in thoroughly from the neck downwards 
and reapplied twice daily for the following three or four days ; 
a final bath is taken at the end of this period and a complete 
change of clothing made. At the end of treatment clothes and 
bedclothes should be changed ; clothes that cannot be laundered 
should be disinfected by heat. Any temperature above 49° C. 
will kill the sarcoptes in five minutes. 

All these treatments cause some irritation, and dermatitis is 
a common sequel ; after treatment with sulphur ointments 
the skin, especially in fair-skinned subjects and in children, 
may become red and scaly ; in some cases the patient assumes 
that he is not cured, and adds to the trouble by further treat- 
ment. Dermatitis also occasionally follows treatment with 
benzyl benzoate, owing to allergic sensitivity ; in such oases 
the dermatitis is severe though fortunately short-lived. 

Eczema complicating scabies requires special treatment 
after the parasitic infection has been dealt with ; White’s 
crude tar paste diluted with one or two parts of zinc ointment 
is useful in these oases {jnde Therapeutic Section, p. 1138). 


EXTERNAL TREATMENT 

Cutaneous lesions often require treatment by sm^ery, the 
galvano-oautery, electro-coagulation, electrolysis, carbon dioxide 
snow. X-ray, and radium. For information concerning such 
methods the reader is referred to works on dermatology. 

In addition local applications of various kinds are of great 
importance in the treatment of diaeaee of the skin. Sometimes 
the restoration of superficial damage is best acWeved by 
attention to oleemliness and the application of protective lotions, 
liniments, (seams, or pastes. In other oases it is desirable to 
use ohemioal agents having bacteriostatic, antiseptio, fungicidal, 
or smtipararitio juoperries, or rubefacients, reduci]^ and caustio 
agents. Some of these may be incorporated into powders, 
lotions, creams, pastes, ointments, and paints, while occasionally 
tlmy Me used in the pore state. 

It is not necessary to employ a lar^ number of remedies. 



1134 


COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 

Qltaitof Acmti* — ^1^ ^ nselaas to apply o fwnody to m Moo which it covered 
with a onist or scab until the latter has been removed. Water, being hypo* 
tonic, exerts a maeeimtiiig aotkm on damaged tiaanea and ia generally nnaultame 
lor ihk pnrpoae ; mmmil aaiine may» ht^ver, he naed. Simple lotioiia, to 
which amah qnantitiea of antiaeptifle may be added il neoemary, often aerve 
the double porpoae of deandna and proteeting a damaged akin. The atareh 
and boric ponmoe ia a valnam oleanamg agent. To four tableapooiitiila of 
ataroh are added one or two teaapoonfola el bofie acid and enoi^h cold water 
to make a thick paate. Boiling watar ia added alowty with continiioaa atiixing 
until the ataroh bunts. Tkb poultloe la spead out thloldT on finen or Hnt, 
and the auifsee to be placed againat the akm oovand with Mter muaUn* 


.. . — An acutely infiamad aurfaea reqniraa an 

applioaticm with cooling and soothing jpropertiea such aa a dmplc ioti<m, 
liniment, or powder. Lotions and oily Imii^ta by facilitating diatnage are 
aoitahle appUcatioiia for weeping aoriaoaa. teona ooaing or wae|diig ia 
generally auooaedad bv deequamaScm, which ia usually the remt of parakeia* 
toaia. llie superfioial oella have not undergone their normal transformation 
into the homogeneous homy layer and are laeking mainly ia fat. Oreama, 
paataa. and ofotroenta are used to supplement this Mdenoy until the normal 
homy layer has been reformed. To these, other auhatancea with anti-pruHtio 
or mildly stimulating propertlea may sometimes be added. 


Calanine Tiotiop 

Prepared calamine, 15 grains. 

Zinc oxide, 15 grains. 

Glycerin, 20 minima. 

JJmo water to I ftnld ounoe. 

Solution of coal tar, 0*5-1 duid drachm, 
or phenol, 5*10 grains, may be added 
to each fluid ounoe to allay proritla. 


/ ndifgltijfia. 

Hay be used lor erythema* 
urtioaria, the erythematous and 
early vesicular stage of ecsema, 
and eesematous dmnatitis. 


Watery Paste— 

Zinc oxide, 24 par cant. 
Titanium oxide, 21 par cent. 
Colloidal kaolin, 8*5 per cent. 
Glyoerin, 15*5 per cent. 
Water, 31 per cent. 


(Semoo, H. C., and Hermann, FA 
Bioi^olam. B.D.H. 

Acute weraing or eiyihematoaa 
darmatitik 


Laad Lotion — 

Dflutad aolutioa of lead sobaeatata Indications as above. 
E.P. 


fyiamiiiA XAuimsnt— * 

oxide, SuitaUe for the vesleolar and 

Oalamlna, oi eadi 4S0 grains. weepi n g stage of eocema, 

Pcfwd. gum t w ifa e a nt h , iO grains. 

Phenol, 10 jpaM 
Glycarin, 10 rofnlnm 
<^dl,4fl«ldmttteas. 

Water to 30 fluid ouaeaa. 


Ormms . — Oraema are fatty pteparationa containing water* 

Zinc Oraam, B.P.C. — IndicatioMS* 

ZIne oxide, 1 ounce. Dcaquamative stage d 

Anhydfoua lamiM 3 d«nc^^ 

Oliva oil, 1 fluid ounca. 
lime water, 5 fluid drachma. 



EXTERNAL TREATMENT 1136 

Fxoteetim and Soothiiig RemadiMH-coiUtnued. 

Water-8olub]6 baae — 

Liquid paraffin, 14 per cent. 

Soft wmte pan^n, 10*5 per cent. 

Cetyl fltearyl alcohol, 10*5 per cent. 

Water to 100 per cent. 

(Medicaments may be added.) 

In reoent years the introduction of a large series of emulsifying agents of a 
new type has opened up new possibilities in external treatment. The emulsiher 
chiefly used in this country is Lanette wax 8X ; it is a mixture of 90 per cent, 
oetyi aloohol and stearyl alcohols containing 10 per cent, of a sodium alkyl sulphate. 
When this or an emii^ifier of a similar type is added to various oils, e.g.y liquid 
para^ or soft paraffin, which do not mix with water, the mixture readily forms 
an emulsion with water, known as an oil in water emulsion. Into such an emulsion 
or cream various medicaments may be introduced. A great advantage of such a 
vehicle is that by decreasing surface tension between the preparation and the skin, 
it permits far more intimate contact with the skin than is possible when the older 
type of base is used. It has the additional advantage of being readily removed 
with water. The new type of vehicle is usually termed a “ water-soluble base.” 


Posies . — These are preparations having usually a fatty or petroleum base in which 
inert powders such as slarch, kaolin, or zinc oxide art incorporated. 


Compound aino paste (Syn. Laasar's 
Paste) B.P.C. 

Salicylic acid, 2*0. 

Zinc oxide, 24*0. 

Starch powder, 24-0. 

Soft paraffin, 50*0. 


Indications. 

A protective paste suitable for 
ecaema in the d^quamatfre 
stage. 


OintmmU — 

Soft paraffin, 160 grains. 
Glycerin of starch, 150 grains. 
Lanolin to 1 oonce. 

Powders — 

Boracio acid powder, 10*0. 
Starch powder, 10*0. 

Oil ol geranium, 0*2. 

Purified talc to 100*0. 

(Mix and sift.) 


Emollient ointment suitable for 
ichthyosis. 


Local application for herpes oatar> 
rhalis, herpes aoster, intertrigi- 
nous dermatitis. Napl^ 
erythema, intertriginous ery- 
thema, erythematous stage of 
eoaema. 


AaltaMpttQi. 

Lotions — 


Alibcmr water (Guy’s Hospital formula). 
C(mer sobhate, 2*0, 

Zinc solpliale, 7*0. 

Saturated aqueous solution of cam- 
phor, 900*0, 

(DteolTe and mix.) 


Ilereuiio ehkdde» 0*1 gmin, 
Sodinmoliloride,5gmLs, 
Water to I fiuld ounce, 
(Diseol^ and mixA 


Sodium eulpliaoetaiiiide, 2*6-10 per cent. 
Distilled water to 100 per cent. 


fof removal of cmste and for 
cleansing the surface of impetigo 
contagiosa, Bockhardt’s impet- 
igo, and pyodermatitis in 
generaL Must be diluted with 
6 to 10 parts of water. 

U above. 


As above. 



1136 COMMON DISEASES 

OF THE SKIN 

AnllMptioi — ctmiiMMd, 


PainU — 

Indicatums. 

Silver nitrate, 5 to 20 grains. 

Spirit of nitrons ether, 1 fluid oonoe. 
(IHssolve.) 

For painting on fissures caused by 
Btreptooo^. 

Grentian violet, 0*5-1 per cent. 

Calamine lotion to 100 per cent. 

As above. 

Pasks — 


Precipitated sulphur, 30 to 45 grains. 

Zinc oxide, 60 grains. 

Kaolin B.P., 15 grains. 

Benzoated lard to 1 ounce. 

Bookhardt*s impetigo, flgurate 
type of seborrhoeic dermatitiB, 
pustular acne. 

Oinimenk — 


Ammoniated mercury. 5 to 20 grains. 

Soft paraffin to 1 ounce. 

Impetigo contagiosa, pyodermat- 
itis. 

Yellow merourio oxide, 5 to 10 grains. 
Soft paraffin to 1 ounce. 

As above. 

Suiphathiazole, 5-10 per cent. 

Water soluble base to 100 per cent. 

As above. 

Fnagioidfl PUffUMtiam. 


Painis — 


Chrysarobin, 60 mins. 

Acetone, 3 fluid drachms. 

Reotifled spirit to i fluid ounce. 

Ringworm, espeoiaUy e^enno- 
phytosis of interdigital folds. 

Bensdo acid, 25 grains. 

Saliojlio acid, 16 grains. 

Acetone, 2 fluid drachms. 

Rectified spirit to 1 fluid ounce. 

(DiMlve and mix.) 

As above. 

Cmrbcl-f%eim% Paimi (Castellaai) — 


Sat. soL of basic fuchsin, 10 o.c. 

5 percent, aqueous soL of jflieno], 100 o.o. 
Pilter and add. 

Epidermophytosis. 

Boric acid, 1 gramme. 

AUow to stand lor two hours and 
add. 


A0eton«, 5 o.o. 

Allowto stand for two hours and 
add. 

* 

Resotein, lOgrammea. 

(Kaepina duk-oohuiod and well- 
itoppsced bottle.) 


OintmmiU (Wbitlleki*s ointoisni)-^ 


Benxoio acid* 25 grains. 

Salicylic add* 16 grains. 

Soft paiaiBn* 120 grains. 

Oooo*nitt oU to 1 ounoe. 

Binpmm of non^baity surface, 
aMO of tbe scalp aft^ epilation* 



EXTERNAL TREATMENT 


Antt-puiittiio 

Benzyl benzoate, 25 pes oent. 
Lanette wax 6X, 2 pern oent. 
Watet to lOCl per oent. 
Lethane oil. 


1137 

IndieaUona. 

Scabies. 

PedicnloeiB oapitia and pubis. 


Kmloiytio drags, having the pro^rty of softening and destroying keratia and so 
pn^uoing maceration or exfoliation of homy tissue, may be incorporated 
mto mtes, ointments, amd other preparations. The most important is 
salioyuo add. 


KmnOo^ftie Pa$te-- 
Resorcin, 10*0. 

Camphor, 10*0. 

Soft soap, 15*0. 
Pveoipitaled sulphur, 30H). 
Prepared chalk, 5*0. 

Soft paraffin, 30*0. 


Indications. 

Acne vulgaris, particalarly of the 
back and shoulders : should be 
applied for four or five days 
only, then followed by a milder 
sulphur paste or lotion for ’ a 
week before repetition. 


Lotkm — 

Sn^urated potash, 2*0. 

Rom water, 8*0. 

(Dissolve solution No. 1.) 

23axc sulphate, 2*0. 

Rose water, 8*0. 

(Dissolve solation No. 2 ; mix equal 
parte of Noe. 1 and 2 for use.) 


Acne w^aris: produoee exfolia- 
tion. Solution No. 1 must be 
made freshly once in three 
weeks. 


OintnmU — 

Salioylio add, 6 to 25 grains. 
Soft paiaffin to 1 ounce. 


Palmar and plantar keratoses, 
corns, psoriasis, and any con- 
dition in which a preliminary 
removal of accumulated homy 
material is necessary. 


I, — A number of chemical substances commonly used in dermatology 
have been desi^pated reducing agents. Some of them, e.g., pyrogailic acid, 
oliraarobiii, aad lenigaUd, are xeduehig agents in the chemical sense, but others 
sa<m as tar, Mthyol, and sulphur, while having a similar therapeutic action, 
are not known to have an addity for oxygen. Tar and iohthyol have anti- 
pmritie properkiM. 

Indioaiions. 


Chrysaiobiii* 20 to 80 grains. Psoriasis. 

Bolt paraiBii to 1 ounce. 

(Ml*.) 

Diihranol B.P., 0*25-2 per cent. Psoriasis. 

Soft pataiBn to 100 per cent. 

Plmgallio add, 7 per cent. Psoriasis. 

Ohiyiarobin, 10 |»er cent. 

Xia. nidi carboius, 20 per cent. 

Sti^ur, 10 jper oent. 

VaseUjie to 100 per cent. 

(IftBirowiud.) 

B6Mkm of eoal tar, 80 to 80 minims. 

Aamcilatad ttefoa^, 10 grains. 

SiUeylio add, 10 wnim* 

PMUd oliitaaintB.P. to 1 ounce. 


73 


Psoriasis. 



1138 COMMON DISEASES OF THE SKIN 


Bedadiig 

Oil of oade, 30 ^rniiu. 
Sulphur, 10 fframs. 
Salioylio aci^ 10 grams. 
Bolt paralB&u, 120 graius. 
Oooo-nut oil to 1 ounce. 


Indioatiow. 

Psoriasis of the soalp. Chronfo 
seborrhoiio dennatltis of ths 
soalp, pityriasis oapitls. 


Posfst— 

Solution of coal tar, 40 to 60 minims, or 
ammonium iohthosulphonate, 6 to 10 
grains. 

Zinc oxide. 

Starch in TOwder, of each 90 grains. 
Soft paraffin to 1 ounce. 

Crude ooaLtar, 2*0. 

Zinc oxide, 2*0. 

Starch in powder, 16*0. 

Soft paraffin, 16*0. 


Liohenified and scaly eocema. 
Seborrhosio dermatitis of the 
pityiiasiform, and the acute 
and subacute follicular papular 
types. 


As above. Especially useful for 
liohenified eczema and for 
infantile eczema. 


The tar and zinc oxide should be triturated thoroughly, also the starch and 
paraffin, then the two parts incorporated ; resultant paste should be almost 
black. It may be dilnt^ with one or two parts of zinc ointment. 


Caoitict. — ^The use of caustics for the destruction of warts and other cutaneous 
tumours is unsatisfactory, and has become lar^y superseded by carbon 
dioxide snow, the galvano-oautery, electio-coagmtdon,. X-ray, and radium. 
Certain oaustios are, however, of value in the treatment of lupus, and their 
present extensive use is likely to continue. Triohloraoetic acid may sometimes 
be applied suocessfuUy to the treatment of warts. 

/ndtcofions. 

Acid solution of mercuric nitrate. * Exerts a selective caustic action 

on lupus tissue. It is painted 
on the lesions about once in 
three weeks. 


Zinc chloride. 

100 per cent, solution of trichloraoetio 
acid. 


Used as a solid stick for applicattoD 
to lupus of mucous sur&oes. 

Warts, particularly genital or 
seborrhosic warts. 


PainU — 

Tincture of capsicum. Unbroken chilblains. 

Ammoniated camphor liniment B.P., of 
each equal parts. 

OitUmetU — 

Besoroin omtmeut, 24 grains. Broken chilblslns. 

Carbolic acid dntment, 240 grains. 

Zinc oxide, 120 grains. 

Soft paraffin, 2 ounces. 


Oboftbst B. 



APPENDIX 


Examikation' fob Lifb Assxtbancb 

I T may be permissible to remind the physician who is un- 
accustomed to life assurance work that during an examination 
for life assurance he is for the time being the servant of a 
company and not the adviser of a patient. Consequently, he 
should endeavour to give an entirely unbiased opinion on the 
life, remembering that he is not the “ family doctor ” putting 
the best possible aspect on the case in his patient’s interest, 
and that no hint as to the result of his examination must be 
given to the examinee. Also, it should be borne in mind that 
in every examination of this nature, the examiner’s duty is 
to advise the company whether the applicant’s prospects 
of longevity are “ average,” “ imder average,” or defi^tely 
“ bad,” an entirely different proposition from that which 
usually confronts a physician. 

The medical referee chosen to conduct a life assurance 
examination is generally soipe doctor other than the proposer’s 
medical attendant. The main reason for this practice is that 
it is obviously unfair to place the proposer’s own doctor in the 
invidious position of deciding between his duty to the office 
and his natural inclination in favour of his patient. Moreover, 
the company or its chief medical adviser may require further 
information on some doubtful point arising out of the examiner’s 
report, and the private medical attendant’s views, unprejudiced 
by any ptevioudy expressed opinion, ivill probably be more 
helpful in this respect than those of any other doctor. 

The medical report fqrm is divided into two parts ; the first 
concerns the proix>ser’s family and personal history, including 
questions as to (he general mode of living. The second part 
records the results of physical examination of the applicant, 
and concludes with a summary for classifying the life. 

Pteoue information should be obtained from the proposer 
as to the causes of death of any members of his family, and as 
to the duratitm of their last illnesses. In attempts to discover 

list 



1140 


APPENDIX 


toidencies to diseaae, a study of the family history is most 
importMit. This is especially true in oases where a parent has 
di^ of phthisis, as statistios show clearly that among the 
children of tuberoulous parents there is an increased inoidenoe 
of the disease as compared with that among the population 
as a whole. Moreover, the risks of developing phthisis are 
greater during early adult life than after the age of thirty-five 
or forty, and therefore a family history of phthisis is more 
serious if the proposer is young. If he is under weight or 
apparently in any way unfit, it is wise in the presence of a 
family history of phtlusis to recommend the office to decline 
or, at any rate, to defer the proposal. In any case no proposer 
und» i^iirty-five, however fit, should be recommended at 
oordinary rates if a parent has died of consumption. 

After the family history has bemi dealt wil^, the applicant 
is asked whether he has suffered from a numbw of ^>eoified 
diseases. If the proposer has had any of these diseases, brief 
partionlars of the illness, with a note of its duration and severity, 
should be inserted. U, for instance, an affirmative answer u 
given to the question regarding consumption, blood-siutting, 
or pleuri^, the date of the attack should be mentioned, whether 
tubercle bacilli were found in the sputum, mod whether any 
X-ray photographs of the chest axe available. Agadn, ff 
syiffiffis is admitted, the date of the primary infection, the 
duration of the treatment, and the date of the last Wassermann 
test should be stated. A history of syphilis should always 
preclude acceptance at ordinary rates, for however thorou^ 
treatment may have been, there is always a risk of the devdop- 
ment of tabes, gmieral paralyas, or ca^o-vasoular cyphilis in 
middle life. Gonorrhoea without evidence of stricture <a: other 
complications is not a bar to acceptance at ordinary rates, 
provided there has been only one attack. When there have 
been repeated attacks, the habits of the patient are «neralty 
not siK>h as conduce to longevity and the proposal is best 
declined. With regard to any past history of discharge from the 
ear, it is inqiortmrt to know when the diwharge last occurred. 

Following this section of ^ report, questions are asked 
regarding habits in the use of sk^l and drugs. In the 
answers to these questhms the examiner sbmild recognise that 
there will be a tendency to understate the amount of aloohd 
oonsnmed. He should also bear in mind the proposer’s 
occupation and oiroumrtaneee, both of which may tend to 
colour his outlotA sod influence his practice in tlm autetar oi 
tAfxbxA. 

This oonohides ibe interrogation of the pn^oses. While 



APPENDIX 


1141 


teoording tiie aiuwws to the questions the examinsr will have 
am{^ opportunity of forming an opinion not only on the 
ainoerify of tihe applioant, but also on his general appearance, 
devetopment, and usual mo<te of living. Indeed, by this time 
he will fnobably have formed a shrewd idea oi the proposer’s 
ohanoes of being accepted. 

The ph 3 r 8 ical examination is now begun, and its various 
sections will be dealt with in the order in which they commonly 
appear in report forms. 

1. MeeuuremenU . — table of average heights and weights 
(in ordinary clothes) is appended {vide p. 1143). Offices iKuaUy 
allow considerable deviation from the “ average ” where the 
examination is otherwise favourable. Some companies fix a 
definite percentage above or below the average as the limit 
witlun which lives can be accepted at the ordinary rates. This 
method, however, can hardly be regarded as a satisfactory 
way of dealing with any abnormality. A far better standard 
for judging “ overweights ” diouM to the distributicm of fat, 
remember^ that heavy persons are not as a rule good rmks, 
particularly -where there is a tendency to obesity. On the 
other hand, “ li^t weight ” by itself should not to oousidmed 
an unfavourable feature, provided that it has been constant, 
that the chest expansion is good, and the family mid personal 
histories unexceptionable. In «dl cases a chest expansion of 
2 in. should to regarded as the minimum. It may to 
necessary, in some instances, to measure the expansion more 
than once, owing to the proposer’s faulty method of breathing. 
An abdominal measurement exceeding the girth of the unex- 
panded chest is always tm unsatisfactory feature, and such 
proposers can rarely to accepted at ordinary rates. 

2. Cardio-vctscttlar System . — Note briefly, but exactly, any 
abnormality of the heart. If a murmur is present, a note 
diould to made as to its timing and character. In the case 
ci systolic murmurs, it is particularly important to state 
whe^r they disappear witii resjuration or vary according to 
posture. Systolic murmurs which are function^ in character 
are no bar to acceptance at ordinary rates. 

A blood-pressure estimation is essential for all proposes 
over forty. The first attempt may give an unduly high 
reading, often due to nervousness or excitement, and sub- 
sequent readmgs may be quite normal. A syitohc pressure 
persistently over 160, especially in proposers between forty 
and fifty years of age, may indicate the onset of hyperpiesia, 
y-tiH ffl inh oases shoiidd rarely to recommended for acceptance 
even with an increased premium. Low pressures, provided 



1142 


APPENDIX 


they 80 % not below 100 and the proposer is unexceptionable 
in other respects, are not of real sign^cance. Diastolic pressures 
over 100 always indicate pathological hypertension. It must, 
however, be realised that in some oases it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to estimate the diastolic pressure with accuracy. 

The pulse-rate, when first taken, is often imduly rapid 
owing to nervousness, but a later reading may show it to be 
within normal limits. When tachycardia of nervous origin is 
suspected the proposer should be given an exercise tolerance 
test (mde p. 490). This will often reduce the pulse-rate to 
normal. Extra systoles in a 3 roung man are often without 
pathological significance, but when they occur over the age of 
forty they must be viewed with suspicion. 

3. Bespiration . — ^Absence of abnormal physical signs is no 
indication that the lungs are healthy, and in all cases of doubt 
an X-ray of the chest is advisable. 

4. Digestion . — ^The condition of the teeth is now recognised 
as a factor of considerable importance. 

Should a proposer admit to attacks of dyspepsia careful 
enquiries sho^d be made into the details of symptoms and 
treatment. A private medical attendant’s report should be 
obtained. Peptic ulcer treated by operation is rarely, if ever, 
acceptable at ordinary rates of premium, wd such cases should 
be deferred until at least two years have' elapsed since operation. 

5. Oenito-urinary System . — The urine is examined for 
albumen and sugar. Albuminuria is frequently found at life 
assurance examinations in persons under twenty-five years of 
age. The practice of most offices is to require three further 
specimens at later dates ; at least one of these should be 
examined microscopically. Provided all the subsequent speci- 
mens are free of albtunen, the life may be recommended at 
ordinary rates. The discovery of sugar in a young proposer 
may be of small significance, but such a case dways ^mands 
a most thorough investigation, including a glucose tolerance 
curve. Albuminuria or glycosuria in older people is a more 
serious matter and such cases must usually be declined. 

Conclusion . — ^A definite opinion should always be expressed 
as to whether the life is an average risk, acceptable at ordinary 
rates, or an under-average risk, which might be taken with a 
loading, or whetber the proposal should be deferred dr declined. 
Where the life is not an average one, a brief statement should 
be made of the grounds on which sudi a decision has bem 
reached. 